London, July 27 (IANS) Personal computers are fast taking over the place of human beings’ long time best friend, the family dog, a British study has found.
Researchers have found just six percent of us believe that “most people rely more on their dog than they do on their PC,” while 67 percent think the opposite to be true.
Even 38 percent of dog owners confessed to relying more on their PC than on their dog, although 36 percent disagreed. And 71 percent of 18 to 24-year-old dog owners said they relied more on their computer, Daily Mail reported.
According to Paul Allen, editor of Computeractive magazine, which carried out the poll with the Royal Society For The Protection Of Cruelty to Animals, said: “These days you can even take your PC for a walk, provided you have a laptop or tablet.
“It’s only a matter of time until the first PC that fetches your slippers.”
Researchers talked to 2,000 British adults to find out about the change modern technology has brought to their home life. They found that male dog owners are almost twice as likely as female owners to rely on their computer than a canine companion.
Allen said: “With broadband bringing them global news and newspaper sales falling, the family dog even misses out on the pleasure of taking the paper to his owner.”
But it’s not all bad news for obedient dogs.
“The family PC has given dog owners access to a wealth of resources and information that can help with the long-term care that a dog needs,” Allen said.
“From finding the best vets to researching great new walks that all the family can enjoy, the web enables the PC to become a dog’s best friend.”

Due to the nature of the sport, concussions can occur in water polo. In the injury research study conducted in Athens during the Olympic Games comparing injury incidence in all team sports, it was found that water polo was one of the safest of the team sports with a relative low injury rate. Head injury was the most common injury suffered in water polo. As mentioned in the article by Dr. Drum, there are Guidelines available for the diagnosis and management of concussion (Prague Consensus on Concussion 2004). In answer to your question, any athlete who has symptoms of concussion should not be training or competing. All athletes with concussion symptoms should seek medical attention.
Read the full article 'Water Polo: Doctor on Deck'

Bali Climate conference has a message for rural community
The world leaders recognised that 20% of the global emission of greenhouse gases (GHGs) can be contained by forestation. The programme, Reducing Emissions From Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) aims to compensate the developing countries in the tropical region to maintain their forests and discourages deforestation. It allows developing countries to sell carbon offsets to rich countries in return for not burning their tropical forests from 2013.
REDD initiative is the need of the hour when largescale deforestation is taking place across the world for urbanisation, oil palm, soyabean and bio-fuel crop plantation.
The Bali conference also stressed upon the urgent need to cut carbon and methane emissions from tropical forests.
The Bali conference also adopted a resolution on adaptation fund to help poor nations to cope with damage from climate change impact like droughts, extreme weather conditions or rising seas. The Adaptation Fund now comprises only about $36 million but might rise to $1-$5 billion a year by 2030, if investments in green technology in developing nations surges. The fund distinguished the responsibilities of the Global Environment Facility and the World Bank. The fund would have a 16-member board largely from developing countries and would start operating from 2008.
Senior researchers of the United Nations Development Fund (UNDP) had urged the developed countries to urgently discuss adaptation funds as the key to solution of the problems. The Lead author of the recent UNDP report, Kevin Watkins said that as per estimate $86 billion annually. "The figure looks large, but actually it is only 0.2% of the rich countries GDP," he said and added that adaptation fund sourced from multilateral funding in the last two years was only $26 million—the amount spent by UK alone on flood control for a week.
A group of small island communities led by Biotani Indonesia Foundation has urged that the adaptation fund should include a special corpus to cover their initiatives.
The Bali conference succeeded in adopting a resolution on technology tranfer and also Its monitoring. It, however, failed address the vital issue of cut in GHG emissions and deferred it till 2009.
It also postponed until next year any consideration of a plan to fund an untested technology which captures and buries the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide, emitted from power plants that burn fossil fuels.
It also failed to agree whether or not to allow companies to sell carbon offsets from destroying new production of powerful greenhouse gases called hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). Benefiting factories have been the biggest winners under a UN scheme to reward companies which cut greenhouse gas emissions.
Be the first to comment.

India's rice output expected at 100 mn tons in 2012-13: FAO
The global body on the farm sector had earlier forecast the rice output in India, the world's second largest producer, at 98.5 MT. This was due to late onset of monsoon rains leading to deficit in key northern and southern growing areas.
FAO in its latest 'Food Outlook' report said that output prospects in India were marred until August by below-normal precipitation, but have since been bolstered by a revival of the monsoon rains.
"As a result, the country is predicted to harvest 100 MT in 2012-13, 4 MT less than its outstanding 2011-12 season, but still the second best result in history," FAO said.
The country had harvested a record 104.32 MT of rice in the 2011-12 crop year (JulyŅJune).
"While the resulting replenishment of water reserves should foster an expansion of secondary rabi (winter) crop, the rains may have come too late for the main kharif (summer) crop to be unscathed," it added.
The past few months of the 2012 season were dominated by concern over a possible recurrence of an El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) weather anomaly and slow progress of the monsoon rains in India, it said.
"However, in August and September, India's fears were tempered by more generous pattern of the rainfall, and meteorological centre's predictions reverted back to a weak
or neutral ENSO," it added.
According to the
Be the first to comment.

Let’s start with the understanding that the Federal Trade Commission states that if scrap generated in the manufacturing process is reused for manufacturing new product, it can not be calculated as post-industrial recycled content, as this reuse of scrap is a part of the typical manufacturing process. So your first question when receiving post-industrial recycled content data should be, “How did you make this calculation, and where did the recycled waste come from?”
Stakeholder demand for recycled content in building products has been largely driven by the LEED® rating system, and the points gained by contributing to the recycled content credit. Now, since scrap reused in the manufacturing process can not be calculated, many manufactures play a form of the “shell game”.
If a manufacturer has multiple facilities making products that generate scrap which can be reused in all the manufacturing processes then, to calculate post-industrial recycled content, the scrap is just moved between facilities. Now the scrap is claimed to be diverted from landfill and calculated as recycled content.
Please understand that for a recycling program to work, a manufacturer needs a continuous feedstock of waste material, so some of this moving around of scrap is legitimate. If the manufacturer is playing the shell game just “for the points,” then all that is being done is increased energy use and CO2 emissions... how sustainable is that?

The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) has warned computer users that e-mails from scam artists pretending to be FBI agents are spreading a computer virus.
The e-mails tell recipients that the FBI's Internet Fraud Complaint Center has monitored their Internet use and found they have accessed illegal Web sites. The e-mails then direct recipients to open an attachment and complete a questionnaire.
This is a bogus message. The attachment contains a computer virus. DO NOT OPEN OR LAUNCH THE ATTACHMENT. You should DELETE the e-mail immediately.
As a general rule, if you receive an e-mail that you are not expecting, even if you know the sender, DO NOT OPEN IT OR LAUNCH the attachment and DO NOT FORWARD the message. If you are not sure, contact the sender to verify the e-mail. Otherwise, DELETE the e-mail.
The Information and Network Security team has put in place appropriate protections to prevent the virus from spreading. Current anti-virus definitions detect and block this virus.

Nearly half of about 67 million Americans with high blood pressure are not effectively treating their condition and face a high risk of a heart attack or stroke, a U.S. health official said on Tuesday.
About 36 million people have uncontrolled high blood pressure, a condition caused when too much force is exerted by blood as it is pumped through the body and moves against vessel walls, according to a report from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released Tuesday.
"The bottom line is ... most of those in this country who have (high blood pressure) don't have their numbers under control, and because of that we have a very high burden of disease," said Thomas Frieden, director of the CDC.
High blood pressure, a risk factor for heart disease and stroke, contributes to nearly 1,000 deaths a day and $131 billion in annual direct healthcare costs, Frieden said.
The condition is the second most serious public health issue. Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable death in the country, according to the CDC.
Frieden said patients with high blood pressure are either not receiving a correct combination or dosage of medication or are not keeping up with their medication.
Some doctors are not warning patients who have had multiple readings of high-blood pressure, a problem Frieden said could be solved by better systems to track patients.
Of the 36 million Americans with uncontrolled hypertension, about 14 million were not aware of their condition and about 22 million either chose not to take medication or were on inadequate treatment, according to the report, which surveyed adults between 2003 and 2010.
"I think there's clearly a lot of room for improvement," Frieden said, noting that controlling blood pressure often means taking multiple medications daily for the rest of one's life.
High blood pressure can be prevented through diet, exercise and taking drugs such as beta blockers and ACE inhibitors -- which widen arteries. Lowering blood pressure can cut the risk of stroke, heart attack, heart failure and other conditions.
Risk factors include obesity, a sedentary lifestyle, smoking, and chronic difficulties such as diabetes, kidney disease and high cholesterol.

Register New Player
Welcome to our world of fun trivia quizzes and quiz games:
Weather Occurrences of "Biblical" Proportions
"This quiz will deal with the usually normal subject of weather. But weather can take on miraculous traits when dealing with God and the Bible. Here are ten events listed in the Bible that involve weather. (King James Version used)"
15 Points Per Correct Answer - No time limit
According to the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus Christ was involved in some weather a few times in his lifetime. One occurred when he was approaching the disciples. The disciples were attempting to fish in a storm when they saw Jesus walking on the water toward them. When he reached and boarded the boat, the storm subsided. What body of water did this miracle occur on?
Sea of Galilee
Probably the best known event involving weather in the Bible is the Great Flood. Through studying the Bible, theologians have determined the length of time that Noah, his family, and the animals were on the ark. What is the time frame in days that scholars tend to agree on as the length of Noah's captivity on the ark?
Weather happenings were prevalent during the ten plagues of Egypt. One of the plagues featured a horrendous hailstorm, accompanied by fire. Of the ten plagues, which number plague was this?
God and Moses also used the weather to actually END one of the plagues, as it is stated they used a "mighty wind" to drive out this particular plague's results. What was it that the mighty wind was getting rid of?
Blood on the Water
In Exodus 19, Moses had another occurrence with Biblical weather when he went up the mountain to receive God's Ten Commandments. What mountain was surrounded by "thunder and lightning" and a "veil of clouds" during Moses' climb upward?
Mount of Olives
This person experienced some dangerous sea storms upon his attempted fleeing from God's request to go to Nineveh and try and convert the people there. Who was this reluctant evangelist who had a whale of a time surviving the sea storm?
Two people are documented in the Bible as never dying. One was Enoch, who was taken up to Heaven in Genesis 5. The other was this prophet, who according to II Kings 2, "went up by a whirlwind into Heaven". Who was this servant of God who was whisked to Heaven on a chariot of fire by way of a whirlwind?
According to Joshua 10, while Joshua was holding camp in the large city of Gibeon, five kings of surrounding areas banded together to wage war upon Joshua's people. This would prove disheartening to them, as God was with Joshua's men and they were forced to flee after losing the battle. But the weather played a part afterwards. Before they had made the complete retreat back home, the armies were nearly wiped out by what weather phenomenon brought on by God?
According to the book of the same name, this man of God had a vision that featured some unique weather. From the opening verses of the first chapter: "And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire." The vision gets even more intense after that. Who was this godly man?
In the King James Version, along with several other translations, "Peace, be still" are famous words used to stop a storm while riding on a boat. What transpired previous to those words frightened all the passengers on the boat, as the strong wind was threatening to capsize the boat. Who was it that ended this weather malady with three simple words?
John the Baptist
Copyright, FunTrivia.com. All Rights Reserved.
Legal / Conditions of Use
Compiled Nov 12 12

Catholic and Protestant reformers in the 16th century occasionally spoke scornfully of Anabaptists as "new monks," referring to Anabaptist insistence on holy living and intense spiritual life (e.g., TA Elsaß 1, 110-13). Anabaptists occasionally accepted the comparison (Klassen, William and Walter Klaassen, eds. and trans. The Writings of Pilgram Marpeck, Classics of the Radical Reformation, vol. 2. Scottdale, PA: Herald Press, 1978: 217) but more frequently rejected it (Klassen & Klaassen: 215-16; Menno, Writings, 369, 401), in part because monks often came from the socially privileged classes. Several scholars have used monastic history as an aid to interpret Anabaptism (Troeltsch, Ritschl, Davis, Snyder, Martin). Many Anabaptists and Mennonites, beginning with the Hutterite chronicle, pointed to quasi-monastic sectarian medieval movements, especially Waldenses, as forerunners of Anabaptism (these theories are promulgated or discussed by Keller, Gratz, Verduin, Durnbaugh). One of the most extensive efforts to relate monasticism and Anabaptism drew on both monastic and quasi-monastic traditions (Davis). Most scholars have carefully limited their interpretations to pointing out "intellectual parallels" or general similarities; some have argued for direct continuity and influence.
The crucial interpretive question revolves around the nature of monasticism: is it a nonconforming sectarian development critical of the institutional church (Workman) or an intensified institutional core of the ecclesiastical establishment? Or, did monasticism begin as a charismatic, lay, "sectarian" movement in the 4th century but become fully integrated into the sacramental, ecclesial, institutional church by the early Middle Ages (Rousseau, Martin)? How central the critical, separatist aspect of early monasticism is to monastic identity is disputed, even by those within the monastic community (Eoin de Bhaldraithe). Particularly significant in this regard is the distinction between contemplative monastic orders (Benedictine, Cistercian, Carthusian) and more lay-oriented, urban mendicant orders and houses of regular canons of the late Middle Ages (Franciscans, Dominicans, Augustinian Friars, Praemonstratensians, Augustinian Canons). The latter orders were associated with the middle class and were visibly and pastorally active; the former were often but not always associated with the nobility and lived in secluded and rural areas. Most Anabaptist links to "monks" appear to have been with the mendicants and canons regular. Michael Sattler is the main exception to this generalization.
Most interpreters agree that Anabaptists rejected the sacramental and institutional "culture-church" of the Middle Ages in favor of a voluntary, non-institutionalized, even anti-clerical church of the faithful few, in effect, reducing the church to a devout "monastic" core. At issue among scholars is whether the label "monastic" should properly be applied to a sectarian, pure church vision such as that held by Anabaptists, since most monks did not believe that the church was made up solely of monastics, rather, they believed that monks and nuns were part, perhaps the most important part, of the church. The qualities and virtues prized by Anabaptists and Mennonites (hospitality, humility, community, Gelassenheit, obedience, repentance, nonresistance, etc.) were also prime monastic virtues, although all medieval Catholics were exhorted to practice these same virtues.
Significant parallels to monastic spirituality are found in the Mennonite period of post-Anabaptist history in which Anabaptist first-generation identity was transformed into a sacramental, ecclesial, institutional, cultural (ethnic) faith, even though Mennonites, Amish, and Hutterites avoided the language of sacramental and institutional Christianity (Cronk, Martin). During the 1980s growing Mennonite concern about the role of single adults in the church has not yet taken account of the traditional Christian monastic theology, with its implications for both marriage and singleness. Recent scholarship on monasticism emphasizes the social role of celibate communities, which enhanced the role of marriage while creating a sphere of activity for those remaining unmarried (Brown, Leclercq). Further research is needed in all these areas of Anabaptist and Mennonite history and culture.
Cronk, Sandra. "Gelassenheit: The Rites of the Redemptive Process in the Old Order Amish and Old Order Mennonite Communities." PhD dissertation, U. of Chicago, 1977. See also Mennonite Quarterly Review 65 (1981): 5-44.
For Ritschl, Gratz, Verduin, Keller, and others: see Davis, Kenneth R. Anabaptism and Asceticism: A Study in Intellectual Origins. Scottdale, 1974: 27-31.
de Bhaldraithe, Eion. "Michael Sattler, Benedictine and Anabaptist." Downside Review 105 (April 1987): 111-131.
Durnbaugh, Donald F. "Theories of Free Church Origins." Mennonite Quarterly Review 41 (1968): 83-95.
Martin, Dennis D. "Monks, Mendicants and Anabaptists: Michael Sattler and the Benedictines Reconsidered." Mennonite Quarterly Review 60 (1986): 139-64. Reply by Snyder, C. Arnold. "Michael Sattler, Benedictine: Dennis Martin's Objections Reconsidered." Mennonite Quarterly Review 61 (1987): 251-79.
Martin, Dennis D. "Catholic Spirituality and Mennonite Discipleship." Mennonite Quarterly Review 62 (1988): 5-25.
Martin, Dennis D. "Nothing New under the Sun? Mennonites and History." Conrad Grebel Review 5 (1987): 1-27.
Snyder, C. Arnold. "The Monastic Origins of Swiss Anabaptist Sectarianism." Mennonite Quarterly Review 57 (1983): 5-26.
Snyder, C. Arnold. The Life and Thought of Michael Sattler. Scottdale, PA: Herald Press, 1984.
Troeltsch, Ernst. The Social Teachings of the Christian Churches. Translator: Olive Wyon. New York: Harper and Row, 1960: 239-46, 332-33.
For general information on monastic history, see:
Brown, Peter R. L. "The Notion of Virginity in the Early Church." Christian Spirituality: Origins to the 12th C. Editor:Bernard McGinn and John Meyendorff. New York: Crossroad (1985): 427-43.
Gründler, Otto. "Devotio Moderna." Christian Spirituality: High Middle Ages and Reformation. Editor: Jill Raitt. New York: Crossroad (1987): 176-93.
Knowles, David. Christian Monasticism. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969.
Leclercq, Jean. Monks and Love in 12th-C. France. Oxford: Clarendon, 1979.
Novak, Michael. "The Free Churches and the Roman Church." Journal of Ecumenical Studies, 2 (1965): 426-47.
Rousseau, Phillip. Ascetics, Authority, and the Church in the Age of Jerome and Cassian. New York; Oxford, 1980.
Workman, Herbert B. The Evolution of the Monastic Ideal from the Earliest Times to the Coming of the Friars. 2nd edition. London, 1927, reprinted with introduction by David Knowles. Boston: Beacon, 1962.
Adapted by permission of Herald Press, Harrisonburg, Virginia, and Waterloo, Ontario, from Mennonite Encyclopedia, Vol. 5, pp. 601-602. All rights reserved. For information on ordering the encyclopedia visit the Herald Press website.
©1996-2013 by the Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online. All rights reserved.
MLA style: Martin, Dennis D. "Monasticism." Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online. 1987. Web. 18 May 2013. http://www.gameo.org/encyclopedia/contents/M653.html.
APA style: Martin, Dennis D. (1987). Monasticism. Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online. Retrieved 18 May 2013, from http://www.gameo.org/encyclopedia/contents/M653.html.

Young People's Conference
Young People's Conference was a youth movement in the Mennonite Church (MC) which flourished for a short time between 1920-23, and led in part to the creation of the Young People's Problems Committee. It had its origin in a "General Conference of Mennonites in France in Reconstruction Work" held at Clermont-en-Argonne, Meuse, France, 20-22 June 1919. This conference was organized on an intended permanent basis with a constitution whose name was tentatively chosen as "Mennonite Young People's Movement," and which was to meet annually. Its clearly stated purpose was constructive and progressive, and its three annual conference programs represented in effect a Christian Life Conference with accent on the problems of youth. The movement also represented dissatisfaction with the rather slow-moving general church leadership and program, and also a determination to work out a larger and more influential place for the more mature young people in the work and leadership of the church.
Since much of the older leadership of the church reacted with skepticism and even suspicion to the new movement, opposition and tension developed. Differences were sorted out in the end and the movement got started in America, changing its name to the Young People's Conference. Three annual meetings were held: West Liberty, Ohio, 28-30 August 1920; Sterling, IL, 15-18 June 1922; Middlebury, IN (Forks church), 14-17 June 1923. General tensions in the church at this time, resulting in the closing of Goshen College for the year 1923-24 and divisions in a number of congregations in Indiana, Ohio, Ontario, and Eastern Pennsylvania, led to confusion in the ranks of the leadership of the Young People's Conference, and ultimately to the discontinuance of the annual meetings. The committee in charge for the 1923 conference listed Harold S. Bender, chairman; Walter E. Yoder, secretary; John L. Yoder, treasurer; Payson Miller, and Vernon Smucker. Some of the energies of this group were channeled into a biweekly periodical, The Christian Exponent, established on 4 January 1924, and discontinued on 11 September 1928, edited by Vernon Smucker.
Adapted by permission of Herald Press, Harrisonburg, Virginia, and Waterloo, Ontario, from Mennonite Encyclopedia, Vol. 4, p. 1009. All rights reserved. For information on ordering the encyclopedia visit the Herald Press website.
©1996-2013 by the Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online. All rights reserved.
MLA style: Bender, Harold S. "Young People's Conference." Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online. 1959. Web. 18 May 2013. http://www.gameo.org/encyclopedia/contents/Y6873ME.htm.
APA style: Bender, Harold S. (1959). Young People's Conference. Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online. Retrieved 18 May 2013, from http://www.gameo.org/encyclopedia/contents/Y6873ME.htm.

Historical Newspaper Archives Search Tips
Newspaper Archives Last & First Name Search
- Using both name search fields returns newspaper articles in which the surname is automatically "near2" the first name.
- This means the newspaper archive search engine automatically finds occurrences of the first and last names within two words of each other.
- This helps to find occurrences of middle names or initials in the newspaper articles, without having to enter or remember them.
- The "near2" search command is not order specific—meaning your newspaper search will retrieve the person's name no matter in what order it is mentioned: the first name then last name or the last name then first name.
- This search default is intended to bring you the most occurrences of the name you are searching for in the online newspaper archives.
- However, if the person's name is popular, like Smith, try using some of the available search options such as location, date range, and keyword, in order to narrow your search to the specific Smith you are looking for (see below).
Using Advanced Search in the Newspaper Archive Database
- There are two keyword search boxes to narrow your search for newspaper articles: "Include keywords" box and "Exclude keywords" box (see below).
- Use the Date search box to enter a specific date or date range of the newspaper content you want to search online.
Using Keywords & Quotation Marks to Search Newspapers
- All the searches for historical newspaper articles are full-text keyword searches against OCR-generated ASCII text.
- By using the "Include keywords" box and/or "Exclude keywords" box, you can narrow or expand your online newspaper article search.
- Put phrases in quotes like "John Adams" in the "Include" keyword box to limit the newspaper article search to that exact name—versus using the last/first name search that brings back results matching John near2 Adams.
- If you find too many names in the newspaper archive search results, narrow your search even more by typing names or places you do NOT want in your search in the "Exclude" box.
Using Boolean Operators to Search Newspaper Archives
- Use AND, OR, ADJx (order specific), NEARx (order non-specific) and Wildcards, such as "?" and "*")
Broaden or narrow newspaper search queries
- by emptying filled-in fields to broaden your search, or filling in empty fields to narrow your search.
Display newspaper search results in different ways, such as:
- Best matches (this is the newspaper search default)
- Oldest items (based on newspaper publication dates)
- Newest items (based on newspaper publication dates)
- Once changed, the selection will remain the default until you change it again.
Search Newspapers by Date Range
- If you know the date of the newspaper content you are seeking, then use the "Date" search box.
- Enter a specific date or a date range—a variety of date formats are accepted.
- Examples: June 2, 1804, or 1804 - 1849, or June 1804 - August 1949.
Using Colonial English Variant Spellings to Search Old Newspapers
- Many of the newspapers in the historical newspaper archives are very old, and the searches must deal with Colonial English.
- The long "s" character was almost identical to the "f" in many texts.
- When searching old newspaper articles on words containing the letter "s," use the "?" wildcard in place of the "s."
- Note: this can occur whether it is the first letter, a letter within a word, or at the end of a word.
- The double "s" is in words like Massachusetts needs to be replaced with two wildcards in historical newspaper searches.
Examples of Searching for Old Newspaper Articles with Colonial English
|Modern Spelling||Colonial Spellings||Suggested Search|
- In addition, type was set by hand for early American newspapers and printers did not always have enough pieces of type to include all of the letters in a word. This resulted in letters being omitted, or sometimes letters that looked similar were used as substitutions.
- Much of this historic newspaper material did not use standard spellings.
- Examples of some conventions that were common in old newspapers:
- Use of name variants - Smith or Smythe
- Use of "e" in word endings - Chesapeake or Chesapeak
- Dropping the letter "h" - Philadelphia or Philadelpia
- Examples of irregular vowel usage:
- clerk - cleark
- color - colour
- Delaware - Deleware
- Elijah - Elifha
- Israel - Ifreal - Ifral
- Jehovah - Javovah
- Examples of letter e to word endings
- Brown - Browne
- Chesapeake - Chefopeak or Chefopeake
- Clark - Clarke
- highways - highwayes
- Examples of interchanging use of the letters "i" and "y"
- adjoining - adjoyning
- Pennsylvania - Pensilvania or Penfilvania
- rails - rayls
Colonial Newspaper Search Notes
- If in doubt, use wildcards such as the question mark "?" or the asterisk "*" in your colonial newspaper search.
- A question mark is a single-character wildcard and an asterisk multi-character (allows for up to 5 characters) wildcard.

A genome-wide association study appearing in PLOS Genetics that involved thousands of individuals of European ancestry identified five genetic loci that appear to be associated with facial features. Among them: variants in and around genes implicated in prior studies of conditions that are characterized by face and/or skull malformations. The researchers behind the study, members of the International Visible Trait Genetics, or VisiGen, Consortium, argue that the new findings could contribute to what's known about facial evolution and development in humans, while at once laying the foundation for forensic tools for predicting facial features based on DNA alone. For more on this study, see this story from our sister publication GenomeWeb Daily News.
Investigators from the Cleveland Clinic and elsewhere used post-mortem brain samples to look at the epigenetic and transcriptional profiles associated with autism spectrum disorder. As they reported in PLOS One, the researchers relied on arrays and bisulfite sequencing to assess genome-wide gene expression and DNA methylation profiles in two brain regions — the cerebellar hemisphere cortex and the Brodmann area 19 occipital cortex — in samples from nine males with idiopathic cases of autism spectrum disorder and nine unaffected male controls in the same age range. Overall brain expression patterns varied from one individual with ASD to the next. But the team did uncover some shared features within the ASD samples, including lower-than-usual expression of genes in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and protein production pathways in the brain samples from individuals with autism and shifts in the expression of certain brain-related genes.
A PLOS Pathogens study of dengue virus by French researchers explores the basis for the pronounced conservation that's been noted in nucleotides found at the ends of the virus' RNA-based genome. Using chemical synthesis experiments, assays, and other analyses, the group determined that the virus, a representative of the Flavivirus genus, relies on an RNA end-repair process that involves the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase produced by a dengue virus gene called NS5. "Our findings provide a direct demonstration of the implication of a viral RNA polymerase in the conservation and repair of genome ends," the study's authors wrote. "Other polymerases from other RNA virus families are likely to employ similar mechanisms."

Killing Emacs means ending the execution of the Emacs process.
If you started Emacs from a terminal, the parent process normally
resumes control. The low-level primitive for killing Emacs is
This command calls the hook
kill-emacs-hook, then exits the Emacs process and kills it.
If exit-data is an integer, that is used as the exit status of the Emacs process. (This is useful primarily in batch operation; see Batch Mode.)
If exit-data is a string, its contents are stuffed into the terminal input buffer so that the shell (or whatever program next reads input) can read them.
kill-emacs function is normally called via the
higher-level command C-x C-c
save-buffers-kill-terminal). See Exiting. It is also called automatically if Emacs receives a
SIGHUP operating system signal (e.g., when the
controlling terminal is disconnected), or if it receives a
SIGINT signal while running in batch mode (see Batch Mode).
This normal hook is run by
kill-emacs, before it kills Emacs.
kill-emacscan be called in situations where user interaction is impossible (e.g., when the terminal is disconnected), functions on this hook should not attempt to interact with the user. If you want to interact with the user when Emacs is shutting down, use
kill-emacs-query-functions, described below.
When Emacs is killed, all the information in the Emacs process,
aside from files that have been saved, is lost. Because killing Emacs
inadvertently can lose a lot of work, the
save-buffers-kill-terminal command queries for confirmation if
you have buffers that need saving or subprocesses that are running.
It also runs the abnormal hook
save-buffers-kill-terminalis killing Emacs, it calls the functions in this hook, after asking the standard questions and before calling
kill-emacs. The functions are called in order of appearance, with no arguments. Each function can ask for additional confirmation from the user. If any of them returns
save-buffers-kill-emacsdoes not kill Emacs, and does not run the remaining functions in this hook. Calling
kill-emacsdirectly does not run this hook.

US 4884575 A
A cardiac pacemaker pulse generator is adapted to .generate electrical stimuli at a first pacing rate, and to selectively increase the rate to a second higher pacing rate. A timer triggers the rate increase to establish the higher rate as an exercise rate folloing the passage of a preset period of time after the timer is enabled. An external magnet controlled by the patient activates a reed switch to enable the timer to commence timing. The pulse generator is further adapted to respond to a second pass of the magnet over the reed switch after enabling of the timer to thereupon disable the timer before the preset period of time has expired. If the second pass of the magnet occurs after the exercise rate has begun, the element for increasing the rate is disabled to return the pulse generator to the lower pacing rate. The change in pacing rates is made in steps.
1. In combination with an implantable cardiac pacemaker for delivering electrical stimuli to the heart of a patient to pace the heart rate,
said pacemaker comprising:
pulse generator means for selectively producing said electrical stimuli at a fixed resting rate and at a higher exercise rate,
lead means associated with said pulse generator for delivering said stimuli to a selected chamber of the heart, and
timer means for stepping-up said pulse generator means from said resting rate to said exercise rate after an adjustable preset delay following activation of said timer means, said preset delay being of a duration perceptible by the patient; and
external control means for patient initiation of a first command to said pacemaker to activate said timer means.
2. In combination with an implantable cardiac pacemaker for delivering electrical stimuli to the heart of a patient to pace the heart rate, said pacemaker comprising:
pulse generator means for selectively producing said electrical stimuli at a fixed resting rate and a higher exercise rate,
lead means associated with said pulse generator for delivering said stimuli to a selected chamber of the heart, and
delay means for stepping-up said pulse generator means from said resting rate to said exercise rate after an adjustable preset delay following activation of said delay means,
means associated with said pulse generator means and said delay means for maintaining said exercise rate for a predetermined time interval following said preset delay and then returning said pulse generator means to said resting rate; and
an external control means for patient-initiation of a command to said pacemaker to activate said delay means.
3. The combination according to claim 2, wherein said delay means is responsive to a second command initiated by the patient from said external control means at any time after receipt of the first said command and before the expiration of said predetermined time interval, to cancel the activation of said delay means.
4. The combination according to claim 3, wherein the stepping up and returning of said rates at which said stimuli are produced by said pulse generator means is effected gradually.
5. An implantable pulse generator unit for a cardiac pacemaker for use with an external magnet to permit patient-initiated adjustment of pacing rate from a resting rate to an exercise rate and vice versa, said unit comprising:
generator means for generating electrical stimuli at said resting rate,
control means associated with said generator means responsive, when enabled, for controllably increasing the rate at which electrical stimuli are generated from said generator means from said resting rate to said exercise rate, and
timer means responsive to positioning of said external magnet in proximity to said pulse generator unit for enabling said control means an adjustable preset delay period after said positioning, said preset delay period being of a duration perceptible to the patient.
6. An implantable pulse generator unit for a cardiac pacemaker for use with an external magnet to permit patient-initiated adjustment of pacing rate from a resting rate to an exercise rate and vice versa, said unit comprising:
generator means for generating electrical stimuli at said resting rate,
control means associated with said generator means responsive, when enabled, for controllably increasing the rate at which electrical stimuli are generated by said generator means from said resting rate to said exercise rate,
said control means including timing means for maintaining the rate at which electrical stimuli are generated by said generator means at said exercise rate for a predetermined time interval; and
delay means responsive to positioning of said external magnet in proximity to said pulse generator unit for enabling said control means an adjustable preset delay period thereafter.
7. The pulse generator unit of claim 6, wherein said control means automatically returns said generator means to said resting rate following the expiration of said predetermined time interval.
8. The pulse generator unit of claim 7, wherein said control means gradually increases the rate at which electrical stimuli are generated by said generator means from said resting rate to said exercise rate, and gradually returns said generator means to said resting rate following the expiration of said predetermined time interval.
9. The pulse generator unit of claim 6, wherein said delay means is responsive to a repositioning of said external magnet in proximity to said pulse generator unit after said control means has been enabled, for disabling said control means.
10. A cardiac pacemaker pulse generator for generating electrical stimuli to be delivered to the heart of a patient to pace the heart rate, said generator comprising:
means for generating said electrical stimuli at a first pacing rate,
means electrically connected to said stimuli generating means for selectively increasing the rate at which said stimuli are generated to a second higher pacing rate,
timing means for triggering said rate increasing means to increase said first pacing rate to a second higher pacing rate upon passage of an adjustable preselected period of time after said timing means is enabled, said preselected period of time being of a duration perceptible by the patient,
means responsive to a command signal from a patient-activated external device for enabling said timing means to commence timing.
11. The pulse generator according to claim 10, wherein
said enabling means is further responsive to a second command signal after said timing means is enabled, to disable said timing means prior to passage of said preselected period of time.
12. The pulse generator according to claim 10, further including
means responsive to a second command signal while said stimuli are being generated at said second higher pacing rate, for disabling said rate increasing means and thereby returning the rate at which said stimuli are generated by said stimuli generating means to said first pacing rate.
13. The pulse generator according to claim 12, wherein
said rate increasing means is responsive, when disabled, to decrementally reduce the rate at which said stimuli are generated by said stimuli generating means.
14. The pulse generator according to claim 10, wherein
said rate increasing means is responsive to said timing means reaching preset time intervals toward passage of said preselected period of time, for incrementally increasing the rate at which said stimuli are generated by said stimuli generating means in steps as each preset time interval is reached.
15. The method of pacing a pacemaker patient's heart rate using a magnet-controlled implantable pulse generator to adjust the stimulation rate from a resting rate to an exercise rate and vice versa, comprising the steps of
maintaining the stimulation rate of said pulse generator at said resting rate,
initiating a command signal to reset the stimulation rate of said pulse generator to said exercise rate after an adjustable programmed delay period following said command signal, and
returning the stimulation rate of said pulse generator to said resting rate in increments following a predetermined interval of time at said exercise rate.
The present invention relates generally to medical devices, and more particularly to implantable artificial cardiac pacemakers adapted to provide patient-variable stimulation rates appropriate to a condition of exercise by the patient.
The resting heart rate of sinus rhythm, that is, the rate determined by the spontaneously rhythmic electrophysiologic property of the heart's natural pacemaker, the sinus node, is typically in the range from about 65 to about 85 beats per minute (bpm) for adults. Disruption of the natural cardiac pacing and propagation system may occur with advanced age and/or cardiac disease, and is often treated by implanting an artificial cardiac pacemaker in the patient to restore and maintain the resting heart rate to the proper range.
In its simplest form, an implantable pacemaker for treatment of bradycardia (abnormally low resting rate, typically below 60 beats per minute (bpm)) includes an electrical pulse generator powered by a self-contained battery pack, and a catheter lead including at the distal end a stimulating cathodic electrode electrically coupled to the pulse generator. The lead is implanted intravenously to position the cathodic electrode in stimulating relation to excitable myocardial tissue in the selected chamber on the right side of the patient's heart. The pulse generator unit is surgically implanted in a subcutaneous pouch in the patient's chest, and has an integral electrical connector to receive a mating connector at the proximal end of the lead. In operation of the pacemaker, the electrical pulses are delivered (typically, on demand) via the lead/electrode system, including an anodic electrode such as a ring behind the tip for bipolar stimulation or a portion of the pulse generator case for unipolar stimulation, and the body tissue and fluid, to stimulate the excitable myocardial tissue.
Pacemakers may operate in different response modes, such as asynchronous (fixed rate), inhibited (stimulus generated in absence of specified cardiac activity), or triggered (stimulus delivered in presence of specified cardiac activity). Further, present-day pacers range from the simple fixed rate device that offers pacing with no sensing (of cardiac activity) function, to fully automatic dual chamber pacing and sensing functions (so-called DDD pacemakers) which may provide a degree of physiologic pacing by at least a slight adjustment of heart rate according to varying metabolic conditions in a manner akin to the natural pacing of the heart. Thus, some DDD pacemaker patients experience an increased pacing rate with physical exertion, with concomitantly higher cardiac output, and thereby, an ability to handle low levels of exercise. Unfortunately, a significant percentage of the pacemaker patient population, who suffer from atrial flutter, atrial fibrillation or sick-sinus syndrome, for example, cannot obtain the benefit of exercise-responsive pacing with conventional atrial-triggered pacemakers. Moreover, the DDD-type pacemakers are complex and costly to manufacture, which is reflected in a higher price to the patient.
It is a principal object of the present invention to provide a relatively simple and inexpensive pacemaker which provides pacing at a desired resting rate, and which is subject to limited control by the patient to provide a desired exercise rate for a preset period of time following which the pacemaker returns to the resting rate.
Various types of rate responsive pacemakers have been proposed which would sense a physiological parameter that varies as a consequence of physical stress, such as respiration, blood oxygen saturation or blood temperature, or merely detect physical movement, and correspondingly adjust the pacing rate. Many of these rate responsive pacemakers may also be relatively complex, and therefore expensive to the patient.
The present invention is directed toward a low cost pacemaker which can be adjusted at will by the patient, subject to the limited amount of control programmed into the device by the physician for that patient. According to the invention, patient control is manifested by bringing an external magnet into proximity with an implanted reed switch associated with the pacemaker. Of course, limited magnet control has been afforded to the patient in the past for some purposes, such as to enable transtelephonic monitoring of the pacemaker functions. Also, techniques are presently available which permit external adjustment of the stimulation rate of the pacemaker after implantation, as by means of a programming unit available to the physician. For obvious reasons, it is undesirable to give the patient the same latitude to control his pacemaker.
In U.S. Pat. No. 3,623,486, Berkovits disclosed a pacemaker adapted to operate at either of two stimulation rates, and switchable from one to the other by the physician using an external magnet. In this manner, the physician would be able to control the pacer mode and rate according to the needs of the particular patient. The purpose, in part, was to provide a pacemaker which had some adaptability to the patient's requirements. However, once set by the physician, the selected resting rate was maintained for that patient by the implanted pacer.
Another technique for external adjustment of pacing rate by the physician is found in the disclosures of U.S. Pat. No. 3,198.195 to Chardack, and U.S. Pat. No. 3,738,369 to Adams et al. In each, rate control is exercised by inserting a needle through a pacemaker aperture beneath the patient's skin to adjust a mechanism. In the Adams et al. disclosure, the needle is used to change the position of a magnet within the paper to actuate a rate-controlling reed switch.
In U.S. Pat. No. 3,766,928, Goldberg et al. describe an arrangement for continuous adjustment of rate by a physician using an external magnet that cooperates with a magnet attached to the shaft of a rate potentiometer in the implanted pacemaker, to provide the initial setting of pacing rate desirable for the particular patient.
More recent proposals offer the patient limited control over the pacing rate. In U.S. Pat. No. 4,365,633, Loughman et al. disclose a pacemaker programmer which is conditioned by the physician to give the patient the capability to select any of three distinct rates: for sleep, for an awake resting state, and for exercise. The programmer generates a pulsating electromagnetic field, and allows the patient to select any of those three modes with an abrupt change in rate when the coil pod of the programmer is positioned over the implanted pacemaker. It is, of course, necessary to have the programmer at hand in order to change the stimulation rate, and the use of the device in public can be a source of extreme embarassment to the patient.
In U.S. Pat. No. 4,545,380, Schroeppel describes a technique for manual adjustment of rate control contrasted with the activity sensing, automatic rate control disclosed by Dahl in U.S. Pat. No. 4,140,132. According to the Schroeppel patent, a piezoelectric sensor and associated circuitry are combined with the implanted pulse generator of the pacemaker to allow the patient to change from a resting rate to a higher rate by sharp taps on his chest near the site of the piezoelectric sensor. Such an arrangement requires that the sensor be sufficiently sensitive to respond to the patient's sharp taps, and yet be insensitive to the everyday occurrences the patient encounters while undergoing normal activities and which could otherwise result in false triggerings. These include presence in the vicinity of loud noise such as is generated by street traffic, being jostled in a crowd, experiencing bumps and vibrations while riding in a vehicle, and the like. Further, even when controlled in the manner described, this type of switching results in an abrupt, non-physiological change of rate.
Accordingly, it is another object of the present invention to provide a pacemaker which is capable of being controlled externally by the patient to assume exercise and non-exercise rate modes, in a manner that allows discreet and yet reliable control.
Yet another object of the invention is to provide a cardiac pacemaker whose stimulation rate is controllable by and according to a schedule selected by the patient.
Briefly, according to the present invention a cardiac pacemaker is manually controllable by the patient to preset time intervals of operation at a relatively high (exercise) rate and lower (resting) rate according to the patient's own predetermined schedule of exercise and rest. An important aspect of the invention is that the pulse generator may be implemented to undergo an adjustment of stimulation rate from a fixed resting rate of, say, 75 bpm, to a preselected exercise rate of, say, 120 bpm, following a predetermined period of time after activation by the patient using an external magnet, that is, after a predetermined delay following a patient-initiated command signal, and to remain at the higher rate for a preselected time interval. Thus, the patient may effectively "set a clock" in his pacemaker to elevate his heart rate at the time and for the duration of a scheduled exercise session, such as a game of tennis. Moreover, he may activate the pacemaker in this manner in the privacy of his own home well in advance of the exercise session.
According to another aspect of the invention, the pulse generator is implemented to return automatically to the resting rate at the expiration of the preselected exercise rate time interval. Hence, the patient need not carry his magnet with him to readjust the pacer to the resting rate at the completion of the scheduled exercise session. According to this aspect, after operating at the elevated stimulation rate for a time interval preselected to be suitable for the exercise session, say, one hour, the generator resets itself to return to the initial resting rate.
According to another feature of the invention, the rate is incremented and decremented in steps from one rate setting to the other to avoid abrupt changes, and therefore to provide a more physiological rate control than has heretofore been available in manually controlled pacemakers.
A further feature of the invention is that the pulse generator may be activated to disable the exercise rate command at any time after it has been given, including that to produce an early conclusion to an already-commenced exercise session. For example, if a scheduled tennis game or bicycling run is called off by the patient's partner after the patient has programmed in the higher rate, he need merely apply the magnet in proximity to the implanted pulse generator again to cancel the previous command and maintain the fixed resting rate. Similarly, if the exercise session is shortened, the rate may be returned to the resting rate by simply applying the magnet over the pulse generator.
The above and still further objects, aspects, features and attendant advantages of the present invention will become apparent to those of ordinary skill in the field to which the invention applies from a consideration of the following detailed description of a preferred embodiment thereof, taken in conjunction with the accompanying drawing, in which:
FIG. 1 is a block circuit diagram of a pulse generator unit of a cardiac pacemaker according to a preferred embodiment of the invention.
Referring now to FIG. 1, an implantable pulse generator unit 10 includes a pulse generator 12 and batteries 15 housed in a biocompatible metal case 17. Pulse generator 12 is implemented to be rate limited to generate output pulses at rates up to either of two low/high limit rates--for example, 75 pulses per minute (ppm) and 120 ppm, respectively--and to be incremented from the lower rate to the higher rate and decremented from the higher rate to the lower rate under the control of an up/down counter 18 associated with the pulse generator 12 in unit 10. Counter 18 may be set by application of a voltage level to its "up" input to commence counting toward the higher rate, and thereby to incrementally step the pulse repetition frequency up to that rate, and may be reset by application of a voltage level to its "down" input to commence counting toward the lower rate, and thereby decrementally step the pulse repetition frequency down to that rate. This is accomplished under the control of set and reset output voltage levels generated by a flip-flop circuit 21 also housed in case 17. The pulse generator unit 10 also includes a reed switch 25 which is actuable by placement of a magnet 27, external to the skin of the patient in whom the unit 10 is implanted, in proximity to case 17.
Reed switch 25, when actuated, serves to enable a delay timer 29 in unit 10. The delay timer responds to the enabling input to commence timing of its preset time delay interval. At the end of the delay interval, delay timer 29 produces a pulse for application to the flip-flop 21. Subsequent actuation of the reed switch before the timer 29 has timed out serves to disable the timer and reset it in preparation for a subsequent enabling signal from the reed switch. If timer 29 has already timed out before the reed switch is again actuated, the timer will respond to the disabling input, when the reed switch is actuated, to produce another pulse for application to the flip-flop 21. The flip-flop is thereupon reset and produces its reset output voltage level.
The set and reset output voltage levels of flip-flop 21 are also applied respectively to "set" and "reset" inputs of an interval timer 30. Upon being set, the interval timer commences timing out a predetermined time interval, and, at the expiration of that interval, generates a pulse for application to flip-flop 21. Upon being reset, the interval timer 30 is returned to the start of the predetermined time interval in preparation for initiating the timing of that interval on receipt at its "set" input of the next set output voltage level from the flip-flop.
The preset time period of delay timer 29 and the predetermined time interval of interval timer 30 are programmable by the physician according to the desires and needs of the particular patient. If, for example, the patient has a regularly scheduled early morning brisk walking session of one hour with friends, and resides near the starting point of the walk, the time period of the delay timer 29 may be programmed to be fifteen minutes. The time interval of the interval timer 30 is programmed to be one hour in length.
In operation, the pulse generator produces output pulses at the resting rate prescribed (and programmed) by the physician for the particular patient--in this exemplary embodiment, a resting rate of 75 bpm. The pulses are delivered to the stimulating cathodic electrode 35 in the right ventricle of the heart 40 via a lead 42, the reference electrode (anode) and the body tissue and fluids, according to the mode in which the pacemaker is designed to operate.
In the preferred embodiment, the pacemaker continues to operate at that rate unless and until the patient elects to initiate the exercise rate cycle. To do so, the patient places the magnet 27 in proximity to the implanted pulse generator unit 10 at about fifteen minutes prior to the appointed time for the exercise session, as a command to actuate reed switch 25. The patient may then choose to leave the magnet at home or take it along in the glove compartment of his car, since actuation of the reed switch has enabled the delay timer 29 and nothing more need be done by the patient to enable the pacemaker to commence the exercise rate at the expiration of the preset delay period.
Before the end of that period the patient has arrived at the starting point for the exercise session, and at the end of the delay period, the delay timer applies a pulse to flip-flop 21 which responds by generating a set output voltage level. The set voltage is applied to both the "up" input of counter 18 and the "set" input of interval timer 30. Accordingly, the counter commences its count, preferably at a relatively slow rate of, say, ten counts per minute, and correspondingly incrementally steps the pulse generator 12 output rate up to the upper rate limit of 120 ppm, and thereby gradually increases the patient's heart rate from 75 bpm to 120 bpm as the patient commences to exercise. Hence, the patient's heart rate and cardiac output are now at levels adequate for the patient to carry out the exercise session.
The pulse generator continues to supply pulses at the upper rate limit until interval timer 30, which commenced its predetermined time interval with the application of the set input voltage, times out, whereupon the interval timer produces an output pulse which is applied to flip-flop 21 to reset the latter. The flip-flop responds by providing a reset output voltage level for application to the "down" input of counter 18 and the "reset" input of the interval timer. Accordingly, the counter decrementally steps the pulse repetition frequency of the pulse generator down, preferably at the ten pulses per minute rate, to the lower rate limit of 75 ppm corresponding to a heart rate of 75 bpm. In this manner, the patient's heart rate is reduced gradually from the exercise rate to the resting rate at a time commensurate with the end of the exercise session. Also, the resetting of the interval timer by the set output voltage level of the flip-flop assures that the timer is ready to commence timing its predetermined interval on receipt of the next "set" input.
In the event that the exercise session is called off at any time after the delay timer 29 has been enabled and before the interval timer has timed out, the patient need merely place the magnet 27 once again in proximity to the implanted pulse generator unit. If the delay timer has not yet timed out, it is disabled by the actuation of the reed switch, and hence, flip-flop 21 remains reset, interval timer 30 remains reset, counter 18 is at its low count, and pulse generator 12 is at its lower rate limit. If the delay timer has timed out, it produces an output pulse in reponse to the disabling input from the reed switch, thereby resetting the flip-flop, resetting the interval timer, returning counter 18 toward its low count and pulse generator 12 toward its lower rate limit. To that end, delay timer 29 is provided with an internal clock such that, once enabled to time out the delay interval, it cannot be again enabled to do so until the passage of a preselected time interval, which is one hour and fifteen minutes in the present example, unless it has first been disabled during that overall interval. Of course, to cancel the exercise rate, the patient must have the magnet available to issue the second command but, as previously noted, once the delay timer is enabled through actuation of the reed switch the magnet may be kept in a convenient location, such as the glove compartment of the patient's car, to allow cancellation of the exercise rate in private.
Although a presently preferred embodiment has been described herein, it will be evident to those skilled in the art that variations and modifications of the preferred embodiment may be carried out without departing from the spirit and scope of the invention. Accordingly, it is intended that the present invention shall be limited only to the extent required by the appended claims and the applicable rules of law.

US 5459828 A
A method of producing a raster font from a contour font entailing the steps of deriving font metrics and character metrics of font characters in terms of arbitrary font units; scaling the font characters to a selected size and output resolution (pixels per unit length); altering the thickness of vertical and horizontal strokes of each character to a desired thickness, from the measured font metrics and character metrics, and including a difference applied to the thickness of the strokes by the printer process, to cause the strokes to be close to an integer number of pixels and thickness and to compensate for thinning and thickening which the printing engine might produce; bringing the leading and trailing edges of the characters to integer pixel locations, where such locations are based on and scaling the character between the leading and trailing edges proportionally therebetween, and producing a rasterized font from the altered contour font character.
1. A printer processor implemented method for producing a raster font from a contour font defined by a list of points connected by curves, said raster font suitable for printing on a selected printer having known reproduction characteristics, including the steps of:
a) deriving for a contour font a set of font metrics and character metrics of a character in the font defined in terms of arbitrary font units;
b) scaling a character contour defined in arbitrary font units to a selected size in units of pixels;
c) altering thickness of character strokes by adjusting vertical and horizontal coordinates of each point defining the character contour in directions defined by a vector normal to the character contour at each point, by an amount required to obtain a desired thickness from the measured font metrics and character metrics, and an amount required to add to difference thickness thereto in accordance with the selected printer reproduction characteristics, said alteration amounts together causing the vertical and horizontal strokes to be sufficiently close to an integer number of pixels or half pixels so as to cause subsequent numerical rounding to produce uniform results across the font;
d) grid aligning the contour of each character so that leading and trailing edges, and top and bottom edges of the contour of each character fall on whole or half pixel positions; and
e) applying a rasterization function to the contour to convert each contour font character to a bitmap.
2. The method as defined in claim 1 wherein in said grid alignment step, after aligning said leading and top edges of said contours of each character on a whole pixel position, the length of any lines joining leading and trailing edges, and lines joining top and bottom edges, are rounded to an integer number of whole or half pixels, and the trailing edge and bottom edges are aligned at whole pixel positions.
3. In a printing system for printing on a selected printer having reproduction characteristics known and available as contour font correction data, wherein a font to be printed has a set of predefined font metrics and character metrics for each character in the font defined in terms of arbitrary font units, the method of preparing a contour font defined by a list of points connected by curves, for printing on the selected printer including the ordered steps of:
a) scaling each character in the contour font to a selected print resolution in pixels per unit length;
b) altering thickness of character strokes by adjusting vertical and horizontal coordinates of each point defining the contour of each character to a desired thickness in directions defined by a vector, normal to the character contour at each point, by an amount required to obtain a desired thickness from the measured font metrics and character metrics, and an amount required to add a difference thickness thereto in accordance with the contour font correction data for a particular printer, to cause the vertical and horizontal stroke thickness to approximate an integer number of pixels so as to cause subsequent numerical rounding to produce uniform results across the font;
c) grid aligning the contour of each character so that leading and trailing edges, and top and bottom edges of the contour of each character fall on whole pixel positions; and
d) applying a rasterization function to the contour convert each contour font character to a bitmap.
4. The method as defined in claim 3 wherein in said grid alignment step, after aligning said leading and top edges of said contours of each character on a whole pixel position, the length of any lines joining leading and trailing edges, and lines joining top and bottom edges, are rounded to an integer number of pixels or half pixels, and the trailing edge and bottom edges are aligned at whole pixel positions.
A microfiche Appendix, having 5 fiche and 398 frames, is included herewith.
The present invention relates generally to the production of raster fonts from contour fonts, and more particularly, to a method of producing raster fonts from contour fonts taking into account characteristics of the contour font and the printer system which will ultimately print the font.
A portion of the disclosure of this patent document contains material which is subject to copyright protection. The copyright owner has no objection to the facsimile reproduction by anyone of the patent document or the patent disclosure, as it appears in the Patent and Trademark Office files or records, but otherwise reserves all rights whatsoever.
Cross reference is made to U.S. patent application Ser. No. 07/416,211 by S. Marshall, entitled "Rapid Halfbitting Stepper", and assigned to the same assignee as the present invention.
U.S. Pat. No. 4,675,830 to Hawkins is incorporated herein by reference for the purposes of background information on contour fonts. U.S. patent application Ser. No. 07/416,211 by S. Marshall, entitled "Rapid Halfbitting Stepper", and assigned to the same assignee as the present invention, is incorporated by reference herein for the purposes of teaching rasterization.
"Contour fonts" is a term that refers to the use of outlines or contours to describe the shapes of characters used in electronic printing. In a contour font, each character shape is represented by one or more closed curves or paths that traces the boundary of the character. The contour is specified by a series of mathematical equations, which may be in any of several forms, the most common being circular arcs, straight lines, and polynomial expressions. The shape of the contour font is that of the ideal design of the character and, generally, does not depend on parameters associated with any printer. Contour fonts are ideal for use as master representations of typefaces.
Bitmap fonts or raster fonts are composed of the actual characters images that will be printed on a page, and are made by scaling contours to the appropriate size, quantizing or sampling them at the resolution of the printer, and filling the interiors of the characters with black bits or pixels. Achieving high quality in this process is difficult, except at very high resolutions, and requires knowledge of both the marking technology and typographic design considerations. Often, a bitmap font is delivered to a printer. There is a separate bitmap font for each size of a font, and sometimes separate fonts for landscape and portrait orientations.
The advantage of a contour font is that it can be scaled to any size and rotated to any angle by simple mathematics. Therefore, a single font suffices to represent all possible printing sizes and orientation, reducing font storage requirements, reducing the cost of font handling.
The difficulty in this approach is in achieving high quality character images during the sampling process which generates the raster characters from the contour masters. If the contour character is simply sampled, there will be random .+-.1 pixel variations in stroke thickness. If the printing process tends to erode black areas (common in write-white laser xerography) characters will be consistently too thin. If the printing process tends to fatten black areas (common in write black laser xerography), characters will be too thick.
At the high resolution employed in phototypesetters, usually greater than 1,000 spi, no special techniques are required for scaling and sampling the contour font to generate a raster font of any size. This is because although simple sampling necessarily has random one-bit errors, such errors are small compared to the size of the character, making errors insignificant. At 300, 400, and 600 spi though, character strokes are only three or four bits thick and each bit is important. The simplistic methods used by typesetter manufacturers are not sufficient.
U.S. Pat. No. 4,675,830 to Hawkins, uses defined points in a contour font that must be grid aligned to pixel positions, but the stem widths or edges are not aligned.
Of particular importance in generating fonts of optimal appearance are maintenance of uniform and correct stroke thickness among characters of a font and on different printing engines, uniform alignment of characters on a baseline, and uniform spacing of characters.
In accordance with the invention, there is provided a method for conversion of contour fonts to bitmap fonts with automatic thickening and thinning of strokes, and snapping of character edges to pixel or half pixel boundaries.
In accordance with the invention, there is provided a method of producing a raster font from a contour font entailing the steps of: first, deriving font metrics and character metrics of font characters in terms of arbitrary font units; scaling the font characters to a selected size and output resolution (pixels per unit length); altering the thickness of vertical and horizontal strokes of each character to a desired thickness, from the measured font metrics and character metrics, and including a difference applied to the thickness of the strokes by the printer process, to cause the strokes to be close to an integer number of pixels and thickness and to compensate for thing and thickening which the printing engine might produce; bringing the leading and trailing edges of the characters to integer pixel locations, where such locations are based on and scaling the character between the leading and trailing edges proportionally therebetween, and producing a rasterized font from the altered contour font character.
These and other aspects of the invention will become apparent from the following description used to illustrate a preferred embodiment of the invention in conjunction with the accompanying drawings in which:
FIG. 1 shows a block diagram of the inventive optimized scaler rasterizer system.
FIGS. 2A-2E illustrate the development of a raster font from a contour font, using the system described in FIG. 1.
With reference to the drawing, where the showing is for the purpose of illustrating an embodiment of the invention and not for the purpose of limiting same, the Figure shows a block diagram of the present invention which will be referred to and described hereinafter.
FIG. 1 shows a block diagram of the contour rasterization process of the present invention. Beginning with a contour font 10, and with a character "H" shown in contour for illustration purposes at FIG. 2A the contour font is analyzed initially at hint generation step 20. At the hint generation, the parameters defining the font are determined, including measurement of the following metrics and character hints:
TABLE 1______________________________________Font Metric Comments______________________________________Cap-height Height of the H, I or similar letterX-Height Height of the lower case xAscender Height of the lower case k, b, or similar letterDescender Position of the bottom of the lower case p or qThickness of Upper Vertical stroke thicknessCase Stems on upper case H or KThickness of Upper Horizontal Stroke onCase Cross-Strokes upper case E or FThickness of Lower Vertical stroke thicknessCase Stems on lower case k or lThickness of Lower Case Horizontal strokeCross-Strokes thickness on the fThickness of AuxiliaryCharacter StemsThickness of AuxiliaryCharacter Cross-StrokesHairline thickness Thickness of the cross bar on the e or the thin part of the o______________________________________
(See, Appendix, page 13, ICFFontIODefs. Mesa)
Character hints are generated for each character and include the following:
TABLE 2______________________________________Character Metric Comments______________________________________Position of all horizontal Left sides of strokes areedges and indications of leading edges and rightwhether each edge is a sides or strokes areleading or trailing edge. trailing edges.Position of all verticaledges and indication ofwhether each edge is aleading or trailing edge.Direction of the normalvector (perpendicular)to the contour at eachcontrol point in thecontour, pointingtoward the whiteregion.______________________________________
At hint generation 20, the font metrics and character hints are computed. Since no special information on the actual character contours, beyond the contours themselves, is required to perform these computations, any font may be accepted as input. Height thickness metrics are obtained either by examining images of specific individual characters or by averaging amongst several characters. Optionally, if these values are supplied externally, that is, the provider of the font provides these values, the external values may be used instead of the computed values. Edge positions are determined by looking for long vertical or horizontal portions of contours. Normal vectors are perpendicular to the contour, and are computed from contour equations and by determining which side of the contour is black and which side is white. For those points required for curve reconstruction, but which are not on the curve, the normals are calculated as if a normal vector extended from the curve through those points.
In the attached Appendix, the source code, in the MESA language of the Xerox Corporation, is provided demonstrating one possible embodiment of the source code to accomplish the described goals. The Mesa programming language operates on a microprocessor referred to as the Mesa microprocessor, which has been well documented, for example, in Xerox Development Environment, Mesa Language Manual, Copyright 1985 Xerox Corporation, Part No. 610E00170. This particular software is derived from the Typefounders product of the Xerox Corporation, Stamford, Conn. The Typefounders product accomplished all these character and font metrics, but did not provide them externally. (See Appendix, pages 67-319,for relevant Typefounder software modules called by software implementing the current invention including: CharacterOpsDefs.mesa, CharacterOpslmplA.mesa, CharacterOpslmpIB.mesa, pages 67-105; ContourOpsDefs.mesa, ContourOpslmplA.mesa, ContourOpslmplB.mesa, ContourOpslmpIC.mesa, ContourOpslmplD.mesa, pages 106-195; FontOpsDefs.mesa, FontOpslmpl.mesa, pages 196-221; ImageOpsDefs.mesa, ImageOpslmplA.mesa, ImageOpslmplB.mesa, pages 222-265 TypefounderUtilsdefs.mesa, TypefounderlmplA.mesa, TypefounderlmpIB.mesa, pages 266-319) Additional software was added, which makes these values available for subsequent processing (See Appendix, page 1, TypeDefs.mesa for translation of the Typfounder data structure; page 36, MetricsDef.mesa, Metricslmpl.mesa, for measurement of font metrics; page 47, EdgeOpsDef. mesa, EdgeOpslmpl.mesa, for measurement of leading and trailing edge position) and performs the perpendiculars calculations (see, Appendix, page 56, NormalOpsdefs.mesa, NormalOpslmpl.mesa). This information is used for creation of a data structure for "hints" (see, Appendix, page 13, ICFFontlODefs. Mesa for creation of hint format for next steps). Of course, while in the Appendix, the various coded algorithms operating on the contour font data for the hint creation step 20 are given in the Mesa language, implementation is easily made in the Unix-based "C" language. The remainder of the system, and the algorithms incorporated will be described in the Appendix in the Unix-based "C" language.
Selecting a contour font for use enables a program that looks for font data, and designates its final position in an output, while calling the various programs forming the steps that will be described further hereinbelow (see, Appendix, page 320, raster.c). The contour font rasterization program herein described is useful on a variety of hardware platforms, attributes of which can be selected for enhanced operation of the system, such as for example, a greater degree of precision in the calculations (the difference between 8 bit calculation and 32 bit calculation). (see, Appendix, page 340, std.h)
At transform step 30, (see, Appendix, page 343, xform.c) the contour font is converted from arbitrary contour font units, which are supplied by the provider of the font, to a particular size, expressed in units of pixels. Typically, contour font units are provided in terms of the contour itself, i.e., the height or size of the contour font is one (1). That is, lengths of characters are placed in terms of the size of the font character itself. These values must be transformed into pixel unit values, or whatever other value is required, e.g. the scaled font may be 30 pixels tall. Additionally, it is at this point that the contour font is rotated for either landscape or portrait mode printing, as required. Rotation and scaling is accomplished in accordance with a previously determined transformation matrix equation 35, which mathematically determines the conversion of the contour font from font measurements to pixel values at a selected orientation which can be used by the printer. The transformed character H is shown at FIG. 2B.
Subsequent to transformation step 30, at thickening or thinning step 40, font characters are thickened or thinned based on requirements of the transformation, and requirements of the printing process. The character contour is adjusted to make the strokes thicker or thinner to compensate for the xerographic or other marking process to follow. There are three components of the thickening or thinning value. The first compensates for xerographic or other imaging effects. That is, if for example, the marking technology will thin strokes by half a pixel, then strokes are thickened by half a pixel in this step. The amount of thickening or thinning specified in the printer profile 50 separately for X and Y directions, and is created at the manufacturer of the printer, and inserted at the printer profile 50. (see, Appendix, page 348, thicken.c)
The second component of thickening, called residual thickening, is applied to insure uniformity of output strokes after the sampling or rasterization step. This amount for horizontal thickening on upper case letters, for example, is equal to the difference between the calculated ideal output vertical stem thickness, which is obtained by scaling the font metric to the proper size, and the result of rounding that thickness off to the actual pixel width which will be obtained after rasterization. This rounding is performed to the nearest whole pixel if half bitting is not enabled and to the nearest half pixel, if half bitting is enabled. There are separate values for horizontal or vertical directions and for upper case, lower case and auxiliary characters.
The third component of thickening and thinning applies only to very small characters, and prevents drop-outs of fine lines. This amount is equal to the difference between the calculated scaled thickness of the hairlines, after thickening by the font thickening steps, and the minimum stroke thickness specified in the printer profile. When applied, this thickening brings fine lines up to the value of the minimum stroke thickness. The value is zero if the hairline is already greater than the minimum stroke thickness. (This process, referred to as "adaptive thickening," is not disclosed in the source code in the Appendix.)
The actual thickening or thinning applied is equal to the sum of these three components. Each component has an independent value in the X and Y directions. The direction to move each contour control point is specified by its normal vector. The thickened character H is shown at FIG. C.
At step 60, the snap function or grid alignment function is applied. The coordinate system of the character is varied in the horizontal direction to move vertical and horizontal edges to positions where pixel boundaries will be after rasterization, i.e., to a whole pixel position. This is to assure uniform stroke thickness in the rasterized character images. The process is to piecewise stretch or shrink the character to force edges to align the pixel boundaries. On the left hand sides of the characters, the left edge of each stroke is moved to the closest pixel boundary, while the right edge of the stroke is moved to the pixel boundary specified by rounding the stroke thickness. This process gives priority to maintaining uniform stroke thickness over absolute stroke position. That is to say, that after the left edge of the character has been moved to a whole pixel position, the thickness of the stroke, or portion of the character, is examined to determine its thickness. The thickness has already been adjusted in the thickness of thinning step, so that it is close to a whole pixel width. Accordingly, the right edge of the character is then moved to the nearest whole pixel, based on rounding the thickness of the pixel, as opposed to moving the right hand side to the nearest pixel. On the right hand sides of characters, the rolls of left and right edges of strokes are reversed. Right edges of strokes are anchored, while left edges are rounded relatively to corresponding right edges. (see, Appendix, page 355, snap.c).
In one variant of this scheme, the positions of left and right index points or width points, which are those points which determine character spacing and are made to coincide in constructing words, are snapped before the vertical edges.
In the vertical direction, snapping is performed to piecewise stretch characters so that positions of baseline, cap-height, x-height, and descender fall on pixel boundaries. Baseline and descender position are treated as bottoms of strokes, that is, anchored, while cap-height and x-height are treated as tops of strokes, computed relative to the baseline. All characters are snapped to all of these positions, ensuring uniform character alignment. After these font metric positions are snapped, horizontal edges are snapped in the same manner as vertical edges, with lower edges of strokes anchored and upper edges snapped relative to the lower edges in the lower half of the character and upper edges of strokes anchored and lower edges snapped relative to the upper edges in the upper half of the character.
In both horizontal and vertical directions, snapping is performed one edge at a time. That is, the first edge is snapped, stretching the coordinate system of the character slightly on one side of the snapped edge and shrinking it slightly on the other side. The second edge is then snapped, with its pre-snapping position perhaps already modified slightly by the first snap. This sequential snapping helps preserve local character features better than simultaneous snapping of all edges does. When the second edge is snapped, its area of influence on the coordinate grid extends only up to the first snapped edge, which stays in place. This process is then repeated for the remainder of the edges. The snapped character H is shown at FIG. 2D.
Once each character in the adjusted contour font has been placed in the grid and appropriately thickened and thinned, the final step is to sample the adjusted contour on discrete grid. This step 70 can optionally produce half bitted output images, as controlled by the printer profile. Light half bitting produces half bitting on curves and diagonals, while heavy half bitting will also produce half bitted vertical and horizontal edges.
Rasterization in a preferred embodiment of this invention is in accordance with the process described in U.S. patent application Ser. No. 07/416,211 by S. Marshall, entitled "Rapid Halfbitting Stepper", and assigned to the present assignee of the present invention. This application is incorporated by reference herein for the purposes of teaching rasterization. (see, Appendix, page 364, step.c and page 368, step.h for rasterization with halfbitting; page 372, bezline.c for stepping around curve; page 396, fill.c for filling). The rasterized character is shown at FIG. 2D.
It will not doubt be appreciated that numerous changes and modifications are likely to occur to those skilled in the art, and it is intended in the appended claims to cover all those changes and modifications which fall within the spirit and scope of the present invention.

Should I Be a Strict or Lenient Parent?
To be strict or not to be strict, that is the question – in fact, it’s the number-one question among child-rearing and education authorities, among teachers and, of course, parents. It’s doubtful that there is a parent who hasn’t at one time or another agonized over this.
There is a widespread uncertainty on how to be at home (or how to come across in the classroom) – tough or soft, to be a strict disciplinarian or a permissivist. Have you noticed, however, that you seldom hear a parent or teacher admit “I am authoritarian” or “I am permissive”? These are terms reserved for those with whom you disagree.
The question, whether to be strict or lenient, never ceases to be debated in books and articles, or at conferences and conventions. Dr. Gordon points out that this question is what social scientists call a “pseudo problem” and how it also is a clear case of “either-or thinking”. Let’s take a look at what he means by that.
Seldom parents or teachers seem to recognize that it is not necessary to make a choice between these two leadership styles. Few adults know it, but there is an alternative to being at either end of the strictness-leniency scale. There is the choice of a third style.
This alternative is being neither authoritarian nor permissive, neither strict nor lenient. Does that mean being somewhere near the middle of the scale–moderately strict or moderately lenient? Not at all. The alternative is not being on the scale at all! How so?
Authoritarian leadership–whether at home or in the classroom–means that the control is in the hands of the adult leader. It has been researched and proven for decades how ineffective maintaining control through power is. Authoritarianism often creates fearful and subservient children and/or rebellion.
Still, no parent or teacher really wants to suffer the chaotic consequences of unrestricted freedom and lawless permissiveness either. It’s also true that most children are uncomfortable with the consequences of permissiveness. Permissive leadership means that control has been “permitted” to be in the hands of the youngsters. Children of permissive parents usually feel guilty about always getting their way. They also feel insecure about being loved, because their inconsiderate behaviors make them feel unlovable.
So what is that third viable alternative to both, authoritarian and permissive adult leadership? It’s what Dr. Gordon in detail describes in his model of parenting, a set of skills and methods known as Parent Effectiveness Training that are geared toward rearing self-disciplined children in a harmonious family climate.
For now, let’s just emphasize that this new approach to relating to youngsters requires a transformation in the way adults perceive children, as well as a shift in the way they treat them. This transformation can be accomplished by learning a few new skills and methods that are applied in everyday life.
This newsletter will describe and examine each of these skills and methods in its future editions and hopefully contribute to you having a more harmonious and peaceful home.

To the profound comprehension of this law of the intellectual generation of ideas, are due the marvels of Catholic civilisation. To that wonderful civilisation is due all that we admire and all that we see. Its theologians, even considered humanly, put to the blush modern and ancient philosophers; her doctors excite wonder by the immensity of their science; its historians by their generalising and comprehensive views, cast those of antiquity into the shade. St Augustine’s “City of God” is, even today, the most profound book of history which genius, illuminated by the rays of Catholicity, has presented to the astonished eyes of men. The acts of her Councils, leaving aside the divine inspiration, are the most finished monuments of human prudence. The Canonical, excel in wisdom the Roman, and the feudal, laws. Who is before St Thomas in science, St Augustine in genius, Bossuet in majesty, St Paul in power? Who is greater as a poet than Dante? Who is equal to Shakespeare? Who surpasses Calderon? Who, like Raphael, infused life and inspiration into the canvas?
Place people in sight of the pyramids of Egypt, and they will tell you, “Here has passed a grand and barbarous civilisation.” Place them in sight of the Grecian statues and temples, and they will tell you, “Here has passed a graceful, ephemeral, and brilliant civilisation.” Place them in sight of a Roman monument, and they will tell you, “Here has passed a great people.” Place them in sight of a cathedral, and on beholding such majesty united to such beauty, such grandeur to such taste, such grace to such delicacy, such severe unity to such rich variety, such measure to such boldness, such heaviness in the stones, with such suavity in their outlines, and such wonderful harmony between silence and light, shade and colour, they will tell you,
Here has passed the greatest people of history, and the most astounding of human civilisations: that people must have taken grandeur from the Egyptian, brilliancy from the Greek, strength from the Roman, and, beyond the strength, the brilliancy, and grandeur, something more valuable than grandeur, strength, and brilliancy—immortality and perfection.
Donoso Cortes, Essays on Catholicism, Liberalism and Socialism

SAN ANGELO, Texas — MOSCOW (AP) The head of Russia's space agency said Tuesday that cosmic radiation was the most likely cause of the failure of a Mars moon probe that crashed to Earth this month, and suggested that a low-quality imported component may have been vulnerable to the radiation. Vladimir Popovkin also said a manned launch to the International Space Station is being postponed from March 30 because of faults found in the Soyuz capsule.
The statements underline an array of trouble that has afflicted the country's vaunted space program in recent months, including the August crash of a supply ship for the space station and last month's crash of a communications satellite.
Since the end of the U.S. space shuttle program last year, Russian craft are the only means to send crew to and from the ISS.
The unmanned Phobos-Ground probe was to have gone to the Mars moon of Phobos, taken soil samples and brought them back. But it became stuck in Earth orbit soon after its launch on Nov. 9. It fell out of orbit on Jan. 15, reportedly off the coast of Chile, but no fragments have been found.
The failure was a severe embarrassment to Russia, and Popovkin initially suggested it could have been due to foreign sabotage.
But on Tuesday he said in televised remarks that an investigation showed the probable cause was "localized influence of heavily radiated space particles."
Popovkin, speaking in the city of Voronezh where the report was presented to Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin, said two units of the Phobos-Ground probe's onboard computer system went into an energy-saving "restart" mode, apparently due to the radiation, while the craft was in its second orbital circuit.
It was not immediately clear why the units could not be brought out of that mode.
Popovkin said that some microchips used on the craft were imported and possibly of inadequate quality to resist radiation. He did not specify where the chips were manufactured.
Yuri Koptev, a former space agency head who led the Phobos-Ground investigation, said 62 percent of the microchips used in the probe were "industrial" class, a less-sophisticated level than should be used in space flight.
Popovkin said the craft's builder, Moscow-based NPO Lavochkin, should have taken into account the possibility of radiation interfering with the operation and said Lavochkin officials would face punishment for the oversight.
Popovkin later announced that a March 30 planned launch of three astronauts to the space station will be postponed "likely until the end of April" because of problems with the capsule. He did not specify, but the state news agency RIA Novosti cited the director of Russia's cosmonaut-training program as saying leaks had been found in the capsule's seals.
It would be the second significant postponement of a manned Russian launch in the past year. The August crash of the supply ship pushed back a manned launch to the ISS because the booster rocket that failed in the crash was similar to the ones used in manned missions.

European ports install radiation detectors as U.S. delays
Just last week, U.S. officials announced that the Homeland Security Department is slowing plans to roll out 1,400 monitors, each costing nearly $400,000, as part of a $1.2 billion multiyear project. In field tests, the new Advanced Spectroscopic Portal monitors, or ASPs, "led to the determination that additional functional capacity is needed to meet the operational standards," a department spokeswoman announced.
The announcement, which means the machines could take another year to reach U.S. ports, comes after more than a year of sparring between DHS officials and the Government Accountability Office over how effective the technology is as well as testing methods used to evaluate it.
The debate over the new equipment has largely played out in congressional hearings. In September, Government Accountability Office officials argued that DHS testing was based on a "biased" methodology that allowed vendors an artificial edge during the evaluation of their radiation detectors, an allegation Homeland Security officials said was off base.
Officials at the Belgian port of Antwerp, however, are moving ahead with deployment of the ASPs for use in secondary screening.
"We're in the process of finalizing it now," Pascal Fias, a scientist working at the Antwerp port, said last week during an International Atomic Energy Agency-sponsored conference on nuclear trafficking here.
In the Netherlands, Dutch customs officials are already using the ASP detectors in secondary deployments and expect to eventually use them as primary scanners, Fias said.
Containers at ports are typically put through a two-phase scanning process. During the first phase, the shipping containers are sent through very sensitive detectors called plastic scintillators. Plastic scintillators can detect very low-level radiation emissions but are incapable of identifying the isotope emitting the energy.
Due to their sensitivity, they can be triggered by innocuous cargo with trace levels of natural radiation like granite, kitty litter or bananas. In one instance a load of blueberries set off Belgian alarms. The fruit exhibited trace levels of cesium contamination, a legacy from Chernobyl, Fias said.
If the primary detectors discover the presence of radiation, the shipping container is then sent through a secondary screening where customs officials use hand-held devices to determine the nature of the source.
After the latest round of GAO criticism of the DHS technology vetting process, Homeland Security officials suggested the ASP detectors would first be deployed in secondary locations and testing would continue before replacing the plastic scintillators.
While Belgian port officials have no plans to shift the ASP to a primary detection deployment - they say they have the plastic scintillators and might as well use them - the new technology is perfect for secondary screening, they say.
"For the second phase, it makes a lot of sense to use the ASP," Fias told Global Security Newswire, calling the technology currently "the best on the market."
Without the ASP detectors, custom officials must use a small, hand-held scanner to assess the entire shipping container. That is a small scanner and a large box, a combination that has led to complaints from customs officials at the port, Fias said.
By contrast, the ASP scanners are "basically a very, very big detector that can scan the whole of the container," he said. Replacing primary scanners with the new technology requires any new device to be at least a sensitive as the plastic scintillators, Fias notes, a more challenging bar to meet.
The goal with these detector upgrades, both domestically and abroad, is not necessarily increasing the level or radiation detection at ports, but rather smoothing the flow of commerce and making sure current detection regime is not disruptive. U.S. officials have repeatedly said the goal is to lower the number of false alarms at large ports such as Los Angeles/Long Beach. That port, the nation's busiest, has about 500 radiation alerts a day, and DHS officials suggest the new technology could plunge that number to less than 30.
"We want to have a low economic impact. Time is money, certainly in a port," Fias said of Antwerp. "Only 1 in 10,000 containers are delayed for more than a few hours or days."
He expects the ASPs, to be used in conjunction with x-ray scanning, to be rolled out in Antwerp by the end of next year.

Beyond simple math and grouping (like "(x+2)(x-4)"), there are some
functions you can use as well. Look below to see them all. They are mostly
standard functions written as you might expect. You can also use "pi" and "e"
as their respective constants.
Please note: You should not use fractional exponents. For
example, don't type "x^(1/3)" to compute the cube root of x.
Instead, use "root(x,3)".
When you want a quick graph of a function, you can just go to
http://graphsketch.com/[function], like http://graphsketch.com/sin(x).
You can even separate multiple equations with commas, like
For more information on GraphSketch (how it works, etc.), see
my blog post

The pristine waters off Kona, Hawaii, teem with big game and spawn many exciting fish tales. But this tale is unlike any other, a mystery involving a giant slender fish discovered on the surface minus its head and tail, making it nearly impossible to identify.
Sea Strike Capt. Dale Leverone poses with giant headless mystery fish found recently off Kona, Hawaii. In below image, first mate Jack Leverone lies beside the 7-foot-long denizen. Credit: the Leverones
The case may never be solved because scientists have little to go on besides the photos accompanying this post, and because the fishermen filleted the carcass and tossed it overboard.
The only thing that appears certain is that the headless mystery fish belongs to a species that resides at great depth, and is rarely encountered by humans.
The best guess, and some might have already ventured this theory, is that this was an oarfish. Oarfish are long and slender prehistoric-looking fish believed to have spawned tales of sea serpents among ancient mariners.
That’s what Capt. Dale Leverone of the Sea Strike, which stumbled upon the 7-foot-long ribbon-like fish, initially believed.
That’s also what Jon Schwartz supposed. Schwartz, a fishing photographer and friends of the Leverone family, spent an entire day last week trying to solve this mystery, and blogged about his detective work. His title: “Giant Headless Mystery Fish Baffles Fishermen and Scientists.”
But oarfish boast crimson-colored mane-like dorsal fins, tall and prominent near their heads, and the headless fish did not have a detectable dorsal fin. “I thought it was a car bumper, but then I remembered they don’t float,” first mate Jack Leverone told Schwartz.
Schwartz contacted Jim Rizzuto, a veteran fishing writer in Hawaii, and Rizzuto suggested it could be a Hawaiian ridge scabbardfish, which are long and ribbon-like, and extremely rare. But scabbardfish do not get nearly this long, so it was crossed off the list.
Schwartz plunged into Wikipedia and found a species called beltfish, which are long and thin, and a photo of a bunch of them at a fish market in Japan. Not a probable match.
Schwartz also contacted two NOAA marine biologists, who could not provide a positive ID.
I decided to probe on my own and contacted Perry Hampton, vice president of animal husbandry at the Aquarium of the Pacific in Long Beach, Calif.
Hampton said the photographs “do not show enough detail to make a determination” but added: “Despite the apparent lack of red dorsal fin it is hard to come up with any other species other than an oarfish,” based on the size of the specimen.
“The most prominent part of an oarfish’s dorsal fin are the first few spines near the head,” he added. “It is possible that these things were lost along with the head. The rest of the dorsal fin runs the length of the body but usually lays flat in a recessed channel along the fish’s back unless it is alarmed.”
So the headless mystery fish could very well have been an oarfish, but the world may never know for sure. Just as it will never know what kind of shark or other predator chomped off its head and tail, leaving the rest for the Leverones.
They had planned to eat the headless mystery fish, but when they cooked it the flesh turned gelatinous, so they passed.
More on GrindTV
NATURE – Facebook friends capture amazing baby whale, seal footage on same day
SHARKS – Scary moments for divers during up-close tiger shark encounter
FISHING – Bluefin tuna sells for record $1.76 million in Japan

In response to growing demand from western U.S. and Canadian outdoor fruit and berry producers, Biobest is developing a native western bumblebee for outdoor pollination.
Bumblebees are important pollinators of many cultivated crops. By pollinating our fruits and vegetables, they not only help deliver our healthy meals, but are also vital to overall food security. Bumblebees have the edge when it comes to effective pollination. They produce their own heat, which in combination with their furry coats enables them to fly early in the season when it is still far too cold for honeybees and other insects. Unlike honeybees, they also buzz or shake flowers to collect pollen, which assures effective pollination.
The use of bumblebees has allowed growers to produce higher-yielding, better-quality and safer crops. In food crops like greenhouse tomatoes, bumblebees have for many years successfully replaced physical pollination or chemicals previously used to induce fruit set.
The demand for bumblebees to help guarantee crop yield has increased in recent years as honeybees and other natural pollinators have declined, but because native western species have not been available commercially, western U.S. and Canadian growers of field crops like berries, top fruit and canola have been at a disadvantage,
unable to share in the many benefits these pollinators offer.
Biobest recognizes the ecological and economic benefits of using native species for pollination. Having pioneered the use of bumblebees for crop pollination, Biobest has now developed a native western bumblebee species especially for the western U.S. and Canada. Biobest has been successful in rearing a range of native western bumblebee species, allowing them to select the right candidate for the western U.S. market.
The company says that only the species that proves most successful in crop pollination will be launched for use in its native territory. Biobest expects to begin pollination trials in the spring of 2013.
For more information:

Fire ants can present a real problem for home owners. Almost every yard in our area has fire ants. Although they do not cause damage to the turf or other plant material, they can inflict painful stings.
When their mounds are disturbed, the ants become aggressive and will attack anything that disturbs their mounds. An unsuspecting victim can be quickly covered with ants. The stings are usually just irritating and painful. However, some people are highly allergic and can become very ill with just one sting.
Fire ants were accidentally introduced into the United States from South America through the port of Mobile, Ala., in the 1930s and they arrived into Georgia in the 1950s. At present, the ants are present in all counties except for some in the mountains.
Human activity has helped spread the ants through shipments of ant infested nursery stock, soil, sod or other such material. They do not do as well in colder climates, which have slowed their spread northward. States in the western part of the country are trying to control the spread of fire ants through inspections of incoming agricultural products from infested areas and quarantines.
The total elimination of fire ants from an area is not feasible. However, temporary measures can be initiated to control fire ant infestations. But the controls must be used continuously or the ants will return. Many situations exist that do not require the treatment of fire ants, like areas were little or no human activity occurs. However, in high traffic areas, such as lawns and garden areas, control of fire ants is a must.
Killing the queen is very important in controlling fire ants. The queen stays in the mound and continues to reproduce while other ants build the mound and forage for food to feed the colony. Killing the foraging ants without killing the queen will not destroy the mound.
There are basically three methods of treating fire ants. The first way is to broadcast fire ant bait such as Amdro, Logic, and several other brands on and around the mound while the ants are foraging. The ants think the bait is food when it actually is a poison. It goes down to the queen and gets rid of the colony over time.
The second method is to treat the individual mounds with an insecticide drench, such as acephate, carbaryl (Sevin) and several others. The mound drenches use a small amount of the active poison ingredient mixed with water and poured upon the mound.
Some times the "two step" method is used. The fire ants are treated with bait broadcasted into the area and then, seven days later, the mounds are drenched with the appropriate insecticide.
A third method is broadcast applications of granular insecticides. The products are not baits. The products, such as fipronil (Over 'n Out, Chipco, TopChoice), can reduce the fire ant population substantially over time. However, these products only work where they have been directly applied to. Remember, when using chemical pesticides follow all label directions and safety precautions.
One home method is to use boiling hot water. A couple of applications can kill a fire ant mound. However, each mound has to be treated individually and there is the risk of the applicator being scalded by the water. Never use gasoline to try to burn mounds. Besides the risk of setting yourself and the surrounding property on fire, the gasoline will kill the turf and can sterilize the soil. Some "home made remedies" such as grits, are totally useless in controlling fire ants.
Fire ants are a big problem and will continue to be so. But they can be brought under controlled and should in areas of high usage due to their potential danger to human health.
Timothy Daly is an agricultural and natural resource agent with the Gwinnett County Extension Service. He can be reached at 678-377-4010 or email@example.com.

Staff Photo: Jason Braverman Girl Scouts Kennedy Watson, from left, Leah Royes and Kaitlyn Hamlette, of troop 4525 in Snellville, draw signs to promote cookie sales.
Lemon-wedge cookies dusted with powdered sugar and filled with lemon zest flavor
The shortbread cookie
Oatmeal cookies with peanut butter filling
Vanilla cookies covered in caramel and toasted coconut, then striped with chocolate
Cookie topped with peanut butter then completely covered in chocolate
Thin wafer covered in a peppermint chocolate
1912 — On March 12, 1912, founder Juliette Gordon Low gathered 18 girls to register the first troop of American Girl Guides. It was renamed Girl Scouts the following year.
1920s — The first Girl Scout Troops on Foreign Soil were established in China, Mexico, Saudi Arabia and Syria for American girls living in other countries.
1930s — The first sale of commercially baked Girl Scout Cookies took place.
1940s — Girls collected 1.5 million articles of clothing that were then shipped overseas to children and adult victims of war.
1950s — The March 1952 issue of “Ebony” magazine reported, “Girl Scouts in the South are making steady progress toward breaking down racial taboos.”
1960s — The social unrest of the 1960s was reflected in organization actions and Girl Scout program change, including introduction in 1963 of four program age–levels for girls: Brownie, Junior, Cadette and Senior Girl Scouts.
1970s — Girl Scouts contributed to a White House Conference on food, nutrition and health.
1980s — “The Contemporary Issues” series was developed in the 1980s to help girls and their families deal with serious social issues. The first, “Tune In to Well Being, Say No to Drugs,” was introduced in collaboration with a project initiated by First Lady Nancy Reagan.
1990s — Girl Scouting experienced a renewed emphasis on physical fitness with the inauguration of a health and fitness national service project in 1994 and the GirlSports initiative in 1996.
2000s — Grants from Fortune 500 companies such as Lucent Technologies, Intel and Lockheed Martin supported science and technology exploration programs for girls.
2012 — Girl Scouts of the USA has declared 2012 the Year of the Girl: a celebration of girls, recognition of their leadership potential and a commitment to creating a coalition of like-minded organizations and individuals in support of balanced leadership in the workplace and in communities across the country.
SNELLVILLE -- It's that time of year. Across Gwinnett -- and the nation -- young girls dressed in green, brown, tan and blue vests are selling the famous Girl Scouts cookies by the boxes and they have a new cookie this year, the Savannah Smiles.
Haven't heard of it? It's the latest creation to celebrate the organization's 100th anniversary.
The girls from Troop No. 4525 in Snellville, just like millions of other girls, are bound and determined to sell their cookies to anyone who will buy a box for $3.50.
"This is exciting to me because I started out as a Girl Scout with my sister in Brooklyn, N.Y.," Troop Co-leader Qualena Odom-Royes said. "Now being able to share it with Leah (my daughter) and these other girls is exciting and wonderful."
The troop worked on posters to advertise their confectionery sweets and set individual sales goals for 2012.
With much childhood exuberance, Jocelyn Spencer, 8, decided on 81,000 boxes.
"I'm going to get everyone in my family to sell cookies," she said.
And she's not the only one aiming big. The other girls in the troop set goals in the hundreds.
"I'm going to try to raise 400 because I really want all of the prizes," Kennedy Watson, 8, said.
Girl Scout Cookies In Recipes
Try using Girl Scout Cookies as part of fun recipes
In addition to the usual cookies, Girl Scouts of the USA has introduced its latest creation, the Savannah Smiles, to commemorate its 100th year. These celebratory baked goods were created in honor of Girl Scouts founder Juliette Gordon Low's hometown of Savannah and are similar in taste to past customer favorites with bursts of lemon flavor.
The cookie is shaped like a wedge, covered in powered sugar and filled with lemon crisps.
"The Savannah Smiles is actually closer to the original cookies made for the Girl Scout sales. It was one of the first varieties out there," Troop Co-leader Adrienne Cole said.
The cookie is such a new addition to the Girl Scouts, the troops and their leaders haven't gotten to taste-test the lemon flavored treat.
"I really want to try the new cookie," Kaitlyn Hamlette, 6, said. "I like lemony stuff, so I really want to try it."
Ada Hamlette of Loganville, Kaitlyn's mother added, "Everyone is excited about the new cookie and they want to try them. They look like they'll be delicious."
To boost the Savannah Smiles' sales, Troop No. 4525 thought of a strategic marketing approach: Give out free samples while selling boxes around the county.
"I want to give a box of milk to everyone who eats a sample," Spencer said.
Cole chimed in, "Maybe we can get Kroger to donate some milk."
Your hips may be mad that you bought the cookies, but your heart won't feel the same. All of the proceeds from Girl Scouts of Greater Atlanta's fundraising activities, including the cookie drive, stay in the council to serve the girls and volunteers in many ways. The money delivers programs to 41,500 girl members in a 34-county territory, trains more than 18,000 adult member volunteers, provides approximately $52,000 in scholarships for higher education and so much more.
The Girls Scouts of the USA haven't started selling their cookies online yet, but could in the next few years. The organization recommends never buying Girl Scout Cookies on any sites, including Amazon, eBay and other auction or community sites. There is no guarantee of freshness or authenticity.
To keep up with a technological age, the organization is using its website to help buyers easily find troops to purchase from in the area. Starting Feb. 17, the public can use the Cookie Locator, a program set up to help locate girls selling in your neighborhood by entering your ZIP code. To use the locator, visit cookielocator.littlebrownie.com.
To learn more about the Girl Scout's 100th anniversary and the Savannah Smiles, visit www.girlscouts.org.

Become a fan of h2g2
Daniel Boone, a legendary American frontiersman, was once quoted as saying, 'I ain't never been lost, but I may have been confused once or twice'. With all respect to Mr Boone - who was born in Pennsylvania, incidentally - it's incredibly easy to get lost and confused in the forests and mountains of Pennsylvania.
In the course of the state's 300-plus year recorded history, many people have gotten lost and confused. And they've lost plenty of things while stumbling around in the Pennsylvania woodlands - including a surprising amount of gold and silver.
Late in the 1690s, a group of French Canadians, led by Louis Frontenac, departed New Orleans and headed towards Montreal. They sailed up the Mississippi River to the Ohio River turn-off. They then went up the Ohio to the location of present-day Pittsburgh and took the left fork up the Allegheny River. On their rafts were kegs filled with gold coins destined for the Royal Governor of Canada's treasury.
Upon reaching present-day Potter County, Pennsylvania, they started overland, but the heavy kegs of coins made the going slow. Fearing an English or Indian attack, they decided to bury the treasure just north of the location of present-day Coudersport.
They marked their cache of gold with a cross chipped onto a rock. Seneca Indians are said to have seen the cross on the rock, but left it alone because they feared the site had special mystical significance. In time, the marker wore off the stone and the Indians were unable to remember where it was located.
The Frenchmen never returned for their gold and to this day it has never been found.
The Counterfeiter's Gold
Then there's the story of Cyrus Cole who, in the early 1900s, lived by himself in a shack near the swamps outside Eldred in McKean County, Pennsylvania. Cole was something of a bum, surviving by picking berries and trapping muskrats yet, strangely, he was never short of cash.
The United States Secret Service had agents investigating an influx of counterfeit silver half dollars and gold coins in the area, but could never get any leads. Then in 1912, they got an anonymous tip that Cole was the mastermind behind the counterfeiting ring. Armed with a search warrant, the agents searched Cole's shack and found some evidence, but not enough for a conviction.
They searched the swamp for evidence of the minting equipment, but came up empty-handed. Legend has it that Cole buried his counterfeit coins and his real gold and silver profits somewhere on the high ground near Eldred. None of it has ever been recovered.
Civil War Gold
In 1863, during the American Civil War1, a Union Army lieutenant was ordered to escort a wagon that had been fitted with a false base. This disguised compartment contained 26 gold bars each weighing 50 pounds. The wagon was to travel from Wheeling, West Virginia, north through Pennsylvania and then south to Washington, DC - the idea behind this route was to avoid any possible encounter with Confederate forces.
In the early stages of the journey, the lieutenant was sick with fever. During a fit of delirium, he blurted out the fact that the wagon contained a fortune in gold. After his fever broke, the expedition left St Marys, Pennsylvania, heading for Driftwood where they were to build a raft and float down the Susquehanna River to Harrisburg. They never made it, vanishing somewhere in the forests of Cameron and Elk counties.
Two months later, the party's civilian guide stumbled into Lock Haven - 50 miles east of St Marys, the last known location of the convoy. Army investigators interrogated the guide for days and heard that bandits ambushed the group, killing all the soldiers and taking the gold. The Army did not believe this story.
Pinkerton2 detectives were hired to search the area, but all they found were some dead mules in the area of Dent's Run near present-day Route 55 in Elk County. In the early 1870s, human skeletons which were believed to be those of the soldiers were found in the same area.
The guide was drafted into the army and assigned to a fort in the west. A heavy drinker, when he was drunk he would claim to know where the gold was hidden. But when he sobered up, he disavowed all knowledge of the treasure's location.
Local rumour has it that during the past 50 years the modern US Army has sent several teams into the area around Dent's Run searching for the gold. Despite these alleged ongoing searches, the gold has never been recovered.
During the American Civil War, Confederate raiders captured a Union convoy heading from West Virginia to the Philadelphia Mint. The convoy's treasure - some 15 tons of silver bars - was stolen and hidden inside a cave north of Uniontown, Pennsylvania. The rebels sealed the mouth of the cave and never returned for the booty. Some say it's still out there waiting to be discovered.
In 1680, a Spanish treasure ship sank off the Bahamas. A hundred and thirty years later a British captain named 'Blackbeard'3 found the treasure and recovered several tons of silver.
Blackbeard sailed into Baltimore harbour intending to transfer the silver to a British warship for transport to London. Fearing that the ship would be followed and attacked on the high seas, Blackbeard sent the silver overland by wagon to Canada where it would be loaded into a convoy of strong ships.
By the time Blackbeard reached Renovo, Pennsylvania, the War of 18124 had begun and Blackbeard, fearing that the silver would fall into USA hands, buried the treasure in the mountains outside Emporium in McKean County near present-day Route 155. Blackbeard never returned for the silver and rumour has it that it is still there today.
Robber Lewis' Lost Booty
David 'Robber' Lewis made a reputation for himself in the early 1800s, robbing the rich and giving to the poor. He was captured in 1820 and on his deathbed, he confessed to all his crimes and told his jailers of three caches of gold he had hidden in Pennsylvania:
One, containing $10,000 in gold, is said to have been hidden in a small cave along the Juniata River near Lewistown, Pennsylvania. Lewis returned for the cache and couldn't find it because the river had flooded and washed away his trail markers.
A second cache is purported to be buried along the Conodoguinett Creek near the caves he used as a hide-out.
The third, reportedly containing $20,000, is buried in the hills outside of Bellefonte. During his last imprisonment, Lewis is said to have taunted his jailers by telling them that he could see the cache from the jail.
None of these caches have ever been recovered.
Cash at Kinzua
In the 1890s, a man robbed a bank in Emporium, Pennsylvania, making off with $40,000 in cash. Apparently, he got lost and wound up in the village of Hazel Hurst where he collapsed. Not having a good day, our man died of 'exhaustion' a short time later, but not before confessing that he had buried the loot north-east of Kushequa within sight of the Kinzua railroad bridge. The money has never been recovered.
The Belsano Train Robbery
On 11 October, 1924, a train carrying a safe containing a payroll of $33,000 was robbed just outside the Cambria County, Pennsylvania town of Belsano. During the course of the robbery, one of the men who was guarding the safe was shot and killed.
Police in several neighbouring states joined the manhunt for Michelo Bassi and Anthony Pezzi and the murderous duo were apprehended two weeks after the robbery in Terre Haute, Indiana. Each had a gun and $3,000 in cash. The men were convicted of first degree murder and in February 1925, they were executed in the state's electric chair.
The safe and some of the money was never recovered. Legend has it that it may be buried or hidden near the site of the robbery.
The Lost Cave of Silver
Somewhere in the Allegheny National Forest to the west of the town of Tionesta, Pennsylvania is a cave reputed to be full of silver.
During the late 1700s, a white settler named Hill got lost and sought shelter in a cave for the night. Inside the cave he saw veins of silver running everywhere through the walls and ceiling. In the floor was a great pit filled with pure silver. When he managed to find his way home, he was unable to find his way back to the cave.
Hill's story was backed up by an early entrepreneur who traded liquor with the indigenous Indians in exchange for furs and silver. When he asked them where they got all their silver, legend has it that they blindfolded him and took him to a cave matching the one described in Hill's story.
Pure silver was found in Indian burial grounds near Irvine, Warren County - approximately 15 miles upstream from Tionesta. However, the Cave of Silver has never been found.
Other Lost Treasures
An aeroplane carrying a quarter-million dollars in cash crashed near Mount Carmel in 1948. The money was thrown out of the plane just prior to the crash and was never found.
Bandit Michael Rizzalo stole a $12,000 payroll in 1888. He was said to have buried it in a tin box somewhere on Laurel Run Mountain, just outside the town of Wilkes-Bare. The money is supposed to still be there today.
In 1775, a gang of Tories5 hid $100,000 in gold coins in the Wernersville area. The loot was never recovered.
A Handy Tip
When visiting Pennsylvania, don't forget to pack your metal detector.

Schopf, J. William
Adult Nonfiction QH325 .S384 1999
Summary: One of the greatest mysteries in reconstructing the history of life on Earth has been the apparent absence of fossils dating back more than 550 million years. We have long known that fossils of sophisticated marine life-forms existed at the dawn of the Cambrian Period, but until recently scientists had found no traces of Precambrian fossils. The quest to find such traces began in earnest in the mid-1960s and culminated in one dramatic moment in 1993 when William Schopf identified fossilized microorganisms three and a half "billion years old. This startling find opened up a vast period of time--some eighty-five percent of Earth's history--to new research and new ideas about life's beginnings. In this book, William Schopf, a pioneer of modern paleobiology, tells for the first time the exciting and fascinating story of the origins and earliest evolution of life and how that story has been unearthed. Gracefully blending his personal story of discovery with the basics needed to understand the astonishing science he describes, Schopf has produced an introduction to paleobiology for the interested reader as well as a primer for beginning s
Question about returns, requests or other account details?
Add a Comment

Most of the causes of dementia cannot be prevented. Good personal health habits and medical care, however, can prevent some types of dementia. Here are some things you can do:
Dementia caused by stroke - Monitor and control your blood pressure, exercise every day, and eat a balanced diet with plenty of fruits and vegetables to maintain a healthy body weight.
Alcohol-related dementia - Limit the amount of alcohol you drink.
A colleague of mine is in emotional limbo, waiting for his elderly mother to die. Should he drive the 200 miles back and forth to work, so... Read more »
As we age, we tend to use the same vocabulary choices over and over, and, if what I surmise is correct, even those with normal mental ... Read more »
Why am I not surprised? A study has shown that two classes of drugs often given, in tandem, to people with dementia - a population that... Read more »
I am sometimes asked what degrees I have relating to medicine and healthcare, since I speak at conferences to healthcare professionals... Read more »

Many things can trigger depression. It is common during life changes such as adolescence, marriage, birth and menopause. It can be a consequence of your upbringing - such as whether or not you were taught effective coping skills as a child. There is a genetic component to depression, and influences such as diet, stress and illness also play a part.
Being depressed can make you feel out of control and helpless, yet there are many ways to avoid falling into depression.
* Examine your diet. What you eat - or don’t eat - can influence your mood. The same diets that can cause heart disease and arthritis in some individuals - one that is high in sodium and saturated fat, and low in whole, fresh plant foods and unrefined essential fatty acids (EFAs) - can cause depression in others. Likewise, food allergies can also alter brain function and trigger depression (Biol Psychiatry, 1981; 16: 3-19). Wheat, milk, corn, beef and eggs are common culprits (Ann Allergy, 1982; 48: 166-71). But bear in mind that food allergies linked to depression often have an addictive quality - so whatever you eat compulsively may be contributing to the problem.
* Psychotherapy is as effective as drugs. Cognitive behavioural therapy can help those at risk of depression to become more conscious of negative thoughts and attitudes that feed into their depressions. Patients undergoing such therapy can learn to change (or at least mitigate) these unhelpful tendencies (J Consult Clin Psychol, 1989; 57: 414-9).
* Drug-induced depression is very common. Around 200 different classes of drugs have been implicated, including beta-blockers, tranquillisers, corticosteroids and birth-control pills, as well as alcohol and recreational drugs. If you think you may be reacting to a drug, consider switching to another family of drugs or trying other options.
* Environmental pollutants such as heavy metals, petrochemicals, pesticides and other toxins can disrupt the nervous system and lead to mild, but chronic, mood disorders, including depression (Med Clin North Am, 1990; 74: 325-45). Similarly, exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs), especially at work (West J Med, 2000; 173: 94-100) can lead to more depression and suicide in some vulnerable individuals (Bioelectromagnetics, 2001; [Suppl 5]: S132-43).
* St John’s wort is the most effective herbal remedy for mild depression because it works in a similar way to conventional antidepressants. A standardised extract (0.03 per cent hypericin) usually at a dose of 300 mg three times a day can be just as effective as antidepressant drugs (BMJ, 1996; 313: 253-8). What’s more, the side-effects are minimal.
* Traditional acupuncture can be as good as conventional drugs for preventing relapses in depression (Compl Ther Med, 2001; 9: 216-8).
* Electroacupuncture can benefit those suffering from major depression who cannot tolerate the side-effects of antidepressant drugs (Psychiatry Clin Neurosci, 1998; 52 [Suppl]: S338-40).
* Stay active. People who exercise regularly have less depression (Prev Med, 2003; 36: 698- 703). Typically, any aerobic exercise, such as walking or jogging, for 20-30 minutes three or four times a week will benefit mild-to-moderate depression (BMJ, 1985; 291: 109).
* Acknowledge your feelings. Depressed individuals often try to suppress their ‘bad’ feelings, especially those concerning distressing life experiences. ‘Confessing’ your most troubling feelings and experiences in a private diary can have significant long-term benefits on both mental and physical health (J Abnorm Psychol, 1986; 95: 274-81; J Consult Clin Psychol, 1989; 57: 414-9).
* Get a good night’s sleep. Since depression and lack of sleep can form a vicious circle, make sure you sleep well. Stick to regular bedtimes; having curtains that keep the light out will help regulate night-time melatonin secretion; and don’t exercise or take stimulants such as coffee or alcohol before going to bed.

Learning is the means whereby we acquire new working knowledge about the world. Memory is the means whereby we retain that knowledge over time. Our abilities to learn and remember are essential to our sense of self and our ability to function effectively in daily life. Memory is the glue that holds our mental life together. As a result, we are who we are in large part because of what we have learned and what we remember from past experience.
But what is memory? How does the brain capture and sustain it? Why does memory sometimes fail us? Those simple questions, of course, have exceedingly complex answers, and many biological details about the process of memory in humans and other animals remain unknown.
HHMI investigator Eric R. Kandel of Columbia University, however, has provided a good start. His studies of the molecular basis of learning and memory underpin much of what we know about how events are recorded by the brain, processed by individual nerve cells, and etched in gray matter. For his work on learning and memory, Kandel was awarded a share of the 2000 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
In the 1960s, Kandel began his studies of learning and memory by focusing on the behavior of the sea slug Aplysia, which he found to be a marvelously tractable system in which to study the cellular basis of these abilities. With only about 20,000 nerve cells — compared with the roughly thousand billion in humans — and a well-delineated neural circuitry, it proved possible to zero in on a biologically interesting reflex pathway. Like humans and other animals, Aplysia is capable of learning to modify this reflex, and this learning involves making memories.
Kandel found that the cellular basis for memory depends on persistent changes in synapses, the connections between nerve cells. The differences in the strength of these connections come about through learning. Kandel found that when, in the simple withdrawal reflex, the gill reacts to touch, the connection between the sensory nerve cell and motor nerve cell of the reflex are activated. When the sea slug was taught to ignore a harmless touch, the connections between the sensory nerve cell and motor cell weakened. When the same light touch was coupled to an unpleasant fearful stimulus the animal became sensitized. It would now react strongly to the light touch because the same set of connections had strengthened.
Kandel later discovered that short-term memory is kindled by the modulation of synapses and that long-term memory is sustained by the activation of genes. The formation of memories, Kandel determined, is a function of biochemical changes that occur at the synapse. To make short-term memories, the proteins involved in a chain of events at the nexus of nerve cells are chemically altered by the addition of phosphate groups. To cement a memory for the long haul, proteins are added at the synapse to make new connections with sensitization and lose connections with habituation.
In the 1990s, he turned from studying simple forms of learning to more complex forms using genetically modified mice and showed that similar principles for short and long term memory were at work here as well.
By laying a foundation for understanding the events that shape our ability to learn and remember, Kandel's work has helped us understand not only the cellular processes that occur during the acts of learning and remembering, but also - through his work on mice - where things can go wrong when dementia and other illnesses that affect memory arise. The cellular processes revealed by Kandel are among the targets of drugs used to alleviate these disorders of memory. Pinpointing the activity of individual nerve cells engaged in the process of learning and memory may help in the development of new, more effective agents to treat diseases that affect the brain.
Photo: Matthew Septimus

Australia's “exceptional” heatwave has produced record-breaking temperatures, with at least six of the first seven days of 2013 among the top 20 hottest days in the past century.
The extreme January heat has prompted the Bureau of Meteorology to issue a special climate statement, with further updates planned as the scorching temperatures continue.
Data for Monday is still to be fully analysed by the weather bureau, but it may be the hottest of the series and could generate a record average maximum beyond the 40.17 degrees reached on December 21, 1972.
Such a result would make it six days in a row when the national average has been above 39 degrees; tomorrow is expected to make it seven. Prior to this series, the longest run of 39 degrees or more was four days, in 1973.
“This event is ongoing with significant records likely to be set,” the bureau statement said. “A particular feature of this heatwave event has been the exceptional spatial extent of high temperatures.”
The final four months of 2012 were the hottest on record for Australia and January is making an early run at adding to the sequence of especially hot weather.
“Australia-wide, and for individual states, we are currently well above average by many degrees,” said Aaron Coutts-Smith, the bureau's NSW manager for climate services.
Sydney is set to cop its first major blast of the searing heat that has grilled much of Australia for the past week, with 43 degrees forecast.
Today's 40-degree prediction for Perth is one sign that any relief for the bulk of central and southern Australia from the current sweltering temperatures will be shortlived.
“We are seeing that re-intensification” of the heat, said Dr Coutts-Smith.
Melbourne, which is expecting 31 degrees today will feel chilly on Wednesday with a maximum of just 20 degrees before the mercury starts climbing back to 37 degrees on Friday, the bureau predicts.
The data for national averages shows the maximum reached 39.2 on January 2, 39.6 on January 3, 39.3 on January 4, 39.3 on January 5 and 39.6 on January 6.
Interestingly, none of the states has broken individual maximum highs, at least in the data until January 6, underscoring how large in size the overall weather pattern is. The weather bureau's manager for climate monitoring, Karl Braganza on Monday described the event as a "dome of heat" over the continent.
NSW, which is likely to endure extreme temperatures today, has to exceed 44.1 degrees on average to beat the record set on January 14, 1939. This year, the hottest day was on January 5 when maximums averaged 41.1 degrees, with Hay Airport hitting 47.9 degrees, according to data up until January 6.
For Victoria, the hottest day on record was 44.5 degrees on Black Saturday, February 7, 2009, when bushfires left 173 people dead. In the current spate of heat, the hottest day was January 4 when temperatures across the state averaged 41.2 degrees.
Up until January 6, Yarrawonga had posted the hottest temperature in the state at 45.7 degrees on January 5, while Portland's 42.1 on the previous day was a new daily maximum for that location, the bureau said.
Nationwide, the hottest single temperature recorded during the heat - up to January 6 - has been the 48.6 degrees reached at Red Rocks Point in WA on Jauary 3. That's about 2 degrees below the 50.7 degrees all-time record set on January 2, 1960.

How to get Shading Right
Recent improvements to window technology make substantial air conditioning energy savings possible. However, shading remains a time-tested method to accomplish the same end.
Architectural and site shading can have an even greater impact on reducing daily cooling use than upgrading windows. Using both a prototype building and modeling simulations, a study by our team at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) evaluated the relative impacts of different solar load control strategies. The study points the way toward optimizing the interaction of various methods for reducing solar heat gain. This is helpful,as the wide variety of shading options currently available can make choosing an effective solar load control strategy confusing (see Snapshots of Shading Options,HE Sept/Oct '00,p.20).
The prototype house was built in 1998 in Tucson, Arizona, as part of the Department of Energy's Building America program.Its integrated package of energy-saving features includes structural insulated panels (SIPs) for the wall and roof construction, white coating on the roof, spectrally selective windows, architectural shading, an interior location for the air handler and ducts, highefficiency air conditioning equipment, and solar water heating.
Building America (see Clean Breathing in Tract Homes,p. 29) works with five building industry teams to produce advanced residential buildings on a community scale. Systems incorporated into these houses are evaluated by conducting successive design, test, redesign,and retest iterations until cost and performance trade-offs yield innovations that can be cost effectively implemented in production-scale housing.RGC CourtHomes,Inc., built the prototype, with input from the IBACOS Building America Consortium.
Building performance was modeled using a detailed hourly energy simulation tool and was measured while the building was unoccupied for a period of 12 days. Model inputs included direct measurements of the net air exchange rate, surface reflectance,and window transmittance. Model results, after calibration,showed good agreement with the direct measurements of cooling loads and air conditioning energy use. Analyzing the interactions between building performance and solar load control strategies in a prototype house can facilitate the optimization of cost and performance trade-offs in large-scale production.
Typical new productionscale houses in the Tucson market are framed on a slabon- grade foundation with stucco exterior finish and a sloped concrete tile or flat built-up bituminous roof. These standard-practice houses are built using standard construction materials and techniques, including nominal 2 x 4 wood framing,fiberglass batt insulation,1-inch polystyrene sheathing,and double- pane,clear-glass,aluminum frame windows. The slab foundation has no insulation,and the attic is usually vented. A forcedair distribution system provides space heating and cooling,with the air handler located in the garage and the flex duct in the attic. This system is typically supplied by a 10-SEER air conditioner and an 80% annual fuel utilization efficiency (AFUE) gas furnace.
The prototype house differs from these houses in several respects. It has a well-insulated airtight envelope, with minimized air distribution losses. The house's energy-saving features, plus the large ratio of window to floor area in the design, render window contributions more important than they are in conventional housing, particularly in the Tucson climate.
The prototype incorporates several reengineered features into its structural and mechanical equipment systems (see Table 1). Envelope changes include a sealed, insulated, and conditioned crawlspace foundation (a shallow basement) and SIPs (see SIPs Face the Skeptics,HE,Mar/Apr '98). The foundation stem walls are 6-inchthick reinforced concrete, insulated on the interior with a 2-inch-thick rigid foam board (R-10) that serves as the concrete form. Each wall and roof panel consists of a polyurethane foam core sandwiched between 7/16- inch thick oriented strand board (OSB) sheathing. SIPs 41/2 -inches thick are used for the walls, and SIPs 61/2 -inches thick form the flat lowslope ceiling/roof assembly. The walls are finished with synthetic stucco on the exterior. The roof panels are finished with a white singleply rubberized fabric coating on the exterior (the inside is cathedralized, with no attic space). The windows have vinyl frames with a thermal break,double panes, and spectrally selective coatings on the inside of the outer pane (surface two) of the tinted glazing.
Mechanical system features include putting the air handler in an interior chase, locating all ductwork within the conditioned space,and installing a 12-SEER (seasonal energy efficiency ratio) air conditioner. A batch-type solar water heater, with an integral collector storage unit,preheats domestic hot water. The gasfired water heater is coupled with an integrated hydronic space-heating coil in the air handler. The house has a controlled-ventilation system consisting of a separate,single-speed and manual-switch fan that supplies fresh air on demand from the outside to the air handler return plenum.
This ranch-style house is located in a high-density, single-family residential development (see cover photo). The architectural plan has approximately 1,170 ft2 of floor area, including two bedrooms and two bathrooms. The house has a relatively large window area with 272 ft2; four sliding glass doors facing a patio make up about 80% of this window area. The sliding glass doors are partially shaded by the patio cover,which is 24 ft long, 6 ft wide, and 10 ft above ground level (see photograph on p. 24). The front entrance is a solid wood door. Another overhang on the front elevation of the house is an open horizontal trellis made of nominal 2 x 6 lumber; vegetation has been planted and is intended to grow over it. Prior to testing, the interior of the house was fully finished and landscaping was complete. No interior window coverings were installed during the test period.
Building performance measurements included environmental conditions, net air exchange rate,and electric power use during normal operation of the building (see Measuring Thermal Performance). In addition, cooling loads were measured using a co-cooling test protocol in which a six-zone portable air conditioning unit was substituted for the building’s air conditioner. The modeled and measured results were compared; the results showed good agreement for cooling loads and air conditioning energy use. The model was then used to evaluate annual energy use and the impacts of alternative solar load control strategies over a broader range of conditions than could be measured in the field.
The simulation model includes accurate building geometry to account for the effects of shading on windows and walls. The windows are all generally well shaded, either by overhangs or by the adjacent houses. The simulation model was imported into a three-dimensional graphic representation program that has rotational view capabilities to check building geometry.Figure 1 shows the location of exterior walls, windows,doors, and overhangs. Crawlspace walls are evident in this view. Shading from adjacent houses is significant at this site. The geometry of houses and fences to the east and west are modeled as measured at the site; these shading surfaces are also shown in the figure.
How the Shading Options Added Up
For the determination of annual heating and cooling energy,occupied building operation is simulated. The simulation of occupied conditions in this building for a full year predicts that 3,285 kWh of cooling energy and 71 therms of space-heating energy are required per year. Heat gain through the windows is the largest component of envelope load, and it constitutes more than 30% of the total cooling energy load (see Figures 2 and 3).
Figure 4 presents the daily load profiles of air conditioning electricity use on a typical cooling day for four combinations of glazing and shading. In this case, the shading includes both the architectural overhangs and the site shading from adjacent buildings. Standard glazing without shading represents the worst case, and spectrally selective glazing with shading (the existing building) represents the best case. The combination of high-performance glazing and shading achieves a 0.4 kW (14%) reduction in afternoon peak electricity demand and a 12.4 kWh (30%) reduction in daily total electricity used for air conditioning. Architectural and site shading reduces daily cooling use more than upgrading the windows does. The shading combination reduces daily cooling energy use by 9.4 kWh (22%), as compared to 4.4 kWh (11%) for just upgrading the windows.
Architectural shading is clearly very important in reducing cooling loads. It reduces the annual cooling requirement by approximately 23%, whether one starts with standard double-pane glazing or with spectrally selective glazing. In both cases, the heating load increases as the solar gain is reduced, but thanks to the combination of the Tucson climate and the wellinsulated tight building shell, this has little impact. Even in the worst
case scenario, less than 80 therms per year of space heating is required.
In this housing development, site shading plays an important role in reducing morning and evening direct solar gain. The test house is shaded to the east and west by adjacent, two-story houses. This site shading not only reduces the solar gain through the windows, but effectively shades much of the exterior wall area, reducing overall conductive gains as well.
Annual Energy Costs
The cooling and heating loads are combined into a single value by converting the energy requirements to costs. The study assumed that electricity costs 10.5¢/kWh, and natural gas costs 79¢/therm for the first 20 therms a month and 75¢/therm above that. Figure 5 shows annual cooling and heating costs as a function of glazing type, two types of shading, and the orientation of the front of the house. Using the data from this figure and referencing a base case building with standard windows with no overhangs but with adjacent building shading, Table 2 presents the reduction in cooling and heating costs for a subset of combinations.
The existing building has a south orientation, and the combined features lead to a 26% reduction in cooling and heating costs. The total cost of cooling and heating is reduced by more than 10% by adding the presence of the adjacent houses. As expected, the maximum effect from architectural shading occurs if the front of the house faces west, which orients most of the window area to the south. The maximum effect of site shading occurs if the front of the house faces north, which orients most of the window area to the west.With the front facing east, the majority of windows are on the north side, and neither architectural nor site shading has much effect on cooling and heating costs.
- FIRST PAGE
- PREVIOUS PAGE
Enter your comments in the box below:
(Please note that all comments are subject to review prior to posting.)

Take a look at this snapshot from Health Canada's website fact sheet entitled Healthy Lawn Tips.
- Although it may look untidy, leave grass clippings on your lawn when you mow it to provide nutrient recycling.
- Aerate compacted soil in the fall to help oxygen, water and nutrients reach roots.
- Over-seed patchy areas.
- In heavy traffic areas, replace grass with mulch or paving stones.
- Check your lawn for early signs of pests and other problems such as holes caused by small animals digging for insects.
- Set your mower so that your grass is seven to eight cm high to encourage deeper roots and help fend off weeds.
- Water infrequently, but when you do, make sure you allow the water to get deep into the soil (about 1.5 centimetres) to promote deep roots. Over-watering starves the soil of oxygen and invites disease. Apply at least 2.5 centimetres of water. Put a container on your lawn to measure how much you've watered. An empty tuna can is about the right height.
- Maintain good soil with ample depth and organic matter to prevent problems.
- If physical control methods fail and you use a pesticide, be sure the one you pick lists the pest you are trying to control on the label, and follow all the instructions.
More information is available online at www.healthcanada.gc.ca/pmra. Fact sheets include Starting a Lawn, Lawn Maintenance, Life of a Lawn and Common Lawn Problems.

Healthy Eating Plate
Harvard’s New Guide to Healthy Eating
Start here to learn more about the new Healthy Eating Plate created by nutrition experts at Harvard School of Public Health, in conjunction with Harvard Health Publications. The Healthy Eating Plate can be your blueprint for planning a healthy balanced meal, and it fixes key flaws in the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s MyPlate.
How can you follow the Healthy Eating Plate? Here’s a rundown, section by section:
- Fill half of your plate with vegetables and fruits. The more color, and the more variety on this part of the plate, the better. Potatoes and French fries don’t count as vegetables on the Healthy Eating Plate, because they are high in fast-digested starch (carbohydrate), which has the same roller-coaster effect on blood sugar and insulin as white bread and sweets. These surges, in the short term, can lead to hunger and overeating, and in the long term, can lead to weight gain, type 2 diabetes, and other health problems. Read more about vegetables and fruits, or read more about carbohydrates and health.
- Save a quarter of your plate for whole grains—not just any grains: Whole grains—whole wheat, brown rice, and foods made with them, such as whole wheat pasta—have a gentler effect on blood sugar and insulin than white bread, white rice, and other so-called “refined grains.” That’s why the Healthy Eating Plate says to choose whole grains—the less processed, the better—and limit refined grains. Read more about whole grains.
- Put a healthy source of protein on one quarter of your plate: Chose fish, chicken, beans or nuts, since these contain beneficial nutrients, such as the heart-healthy omega-3 fatty acids in fish, and the fiber in beans. An egg a day is okay for most people, too (people with diabetes should limit their egg intake to three yolks a week, but egg whites are fine). Limit red meat—beef, pork, and lamb—and avoid processed meats—bacon, cold cuts, hot dogs, and the like—since over time, regularly eating even small amounts of these foods raises the risk of heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and colon cancer. Read more about healthy proteins.
- Use healthy plant oils. The glass bottle near the Healthy Eating Plate is a reminder to use healthy vegetable oils, like olive, canola, soy, corn, sunflower, peanut, and others, in cooking, on salad, and at the table. Limit butter, and avoid unhealthy trans fats from partially hydrogenated oils. Read more about healthy fats.
- Drink water, coffee or tea. On the Healthy Eating Plate, complete your meal with a glass of water, or if you like, a cup of tea or coffee (with little or no sugar). (Questions about caffeine and kids? Read more.) Limit milk and dairy products to one to two servings per day, since high intakes are associated with increased risk of prostate cancer and possibly ovarian cancer. Limit juice to a small glass per day, since it is as high in sugar as a sugary soda. Skip the sugary drinks, since they provide lots of calories and virtually no other nutrients. And over time, routinely drinking sugary drinks can lead to weight gain, increase the risk of type 2 diabetes, and possibly increase the risk of heart disease. Read more about healthy drinks, or read more about calcium, milk, and health.
- Stay active. The small red figure running across the Healthy Eating Plate’s placemat is a reminder that staying active is half of the secret to weight control. The other half is eating a healthy diet with modest portions that meet your calorie needs. Read 20 tips for staying active.
Comparing the Harvard Healthy Eating Plate to the USDA’s MyPlate shows the shortcomings of MyPlate. Read a head-to-head comparison of the Healthy Eating Plate vs. the USDA’s MyPlate.
You can use the Healthy Eating Plate side by side with the Healthy Eating Pyramid, a simple and trustworthy guide to healthy eating created by faculty in the Department of Nutrition at Harvard School of Public Health. Read an in-depth article about the Healthy Eating Plate and the Healthy Eating Pyramid. Or read answers to common questions about the Healthy Eating Plate.
Download the Healthy Eating Plate
The Healthy Eating Plate image on this Web site is owned by the Harvard University. It may be downloaded and used without permission for educational and other non-commercial uses with proper attribution, including the following copyright notification and credit line:
Copyright © 2011, Harvard University. For more information about The Healthy Eating Plate, please see The Nutrition Source, Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, www.thenutritionsource.org, and Harvard Health Publications, health.harvard.edu.
Any other use, including commercial reuse or mounting on other systems, requires permission from the Department of Nutrition at Harvard School of Public Health. To request permission, please contact us using the Healthy Eating Plate reprint request form on this Web site.
The aim of the Harvard School of Public Health Nutrition Source is to provide timely information on diet and nutrition for clinicians, allied health professionals, and the public. The contents of this Web site are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this Web site. The information does not mention brand names, nor does it endorse any particular products.

Salt Reduction Strategies
Tasting Success with Cutting Salt
Twenty-Five Science Based Strategies & Culinary Insights
Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health & The Culinary Institute of America
Table of Contents
What portion size, produce, fresh foods, and healthy fats have to do with sodium reduction
Why a stealth health approach can help everyone cut back on salt
Which foods are highest in sodium, and how to make lower sodium choices
From the farm to the table, there are many ways to boost flavor that are light on salt
Future research can guide the way to compelling reduced sodium flavors
Download a PDF of
Read more about the creation of
The Institute of Medicine’s newly released report, Strategies to Reduce Sodium Intake in the United States, focuses on big-picture strategies for reining in America’s salt habit. (1) Although the report’s recommendations represent an essential step forward, there are many things that individuals, chefs, and organizations can do right now to reduce sodium.
Consumers can use these tips when they cook at home, shop in the supermarket, or choose a meal at their favorite restaurant. Chefs and product developers can tap these ideas in the professional kitchen. Media representatives, healthcare professionals, and food marketers can mine this list for ways to promote positive and delicious nutrition messages about cutting salt.
Many of these guidelines offer a “stealth health” approach to sodium reduction—ways that sodium can be reduced with no change or minimal change to consumer food experiences or choices. Others suggest ways to rebalance and re-imagine food choices as well as introduce new foods that can easily translate into satisfying meals. These culinary insights are in addition to valuable food science research already underway on the role of salt in foods and salt substitutes. The good news is that most of these guidelines support broader diet recommendations for good health.
No sodium reduction effort will succeed if it undermines the flavor of our foods and the role that food plays in our lives. That’s why we urge a wide-ranging, innovative approach to sodium reduction on the part of all stakeholders, one that puts as much emphasis on culinary insight, taste, and flavor as on the scientific and public health imperatives.
1. Downsize your portions: You’ll scale back the sodium (and the calories).
A good rule of thumb is that the more calories a meal has, the more sodium it has. Two out of three Americans need to lose weight. So skip the supersize. Share a dish when dining out. You can cut your salt—and trim your waist.
Our bodies need more potassium than sodium. But most Americans’ diets are just the opposite, which can contribute to high blood pressure. Fruits and vegetables are naturally low in sodium, and many fruits and vegetables are good sources of potassium. Filling your plate with them will boost your potassium and shift the sodium-potassium balance in your favor. And chefs and product developers would do well to think about produce first when designing menus. The next time you are tempted to say, “I won’t like lower sodium foods” think of biting into a crunchy apple, juicy orange, or sweet strawberry. Not missing the sodium?
3. Get fresh: Choose unprocessed and minimally processed foods.
Processed foods and prepared foods are the greatest sources of sodium in the American diet (75 percent by some estimates). By choosing fresh foods, you can decide how much or how little salt to add. Processed, cured meats typically have much more sodium than fresh meats, and canned vegetables usually have more sodium than fresh vegetables. Going easy on processed foods makes sense for general good health, as processing often leads to a loss of nutrients and other benefits of whole or semi-intact foods.
4. Embrace healthy fats and oils: A savory strategy to lower sodium levels.
Unfortunately, the big low-fat and no-fat product push in the 1990’s wasn’t rooted in sound science. Many well-meaning product developers cut both the good and bad fats out of formulations, and in order to maintain consumer acceptance of their products, they were forced to increase levels of sugar and sodium. So breathe easy, and skip most fat-free salad dressings and other similar products, and you’ll be doing your blood pressure a favor. One more good news tip: Fat in the diet doesn’t make you fat! Extensive research now confirms that low-fat diets are no more effective in weight loss than moderate- to high-fat diets. Rather, it’s all about total calories and energy balance. So embrace healthy fat: It might be just the ticket to make produce-centric (and sodium-reduced) cooking more appealing. For recipes that focus on healthy fat, try:
5. Stealth health: The most delicious approach to sodium reduction.
For many foods and preparations, the average person can’t detect moderate to substantial differences in sodium levels, including reductions of up to as much as 25 percent. That’s great news. In fact, many food manufacturers and restaurant companies have already made or are in the process of making substantial cuts in sodium—some all at once and some over time—that their customers will not be able to detect.
6. Retrain your taste buds: You can learn to savor foods with less salt.
Studies have found that we can shift our sense of taste to enjoy foods with lower levels of sodium. One key to success: Make the changes gradually and consistently over a period of time, rather than trying to cut back by a large amount all at once (unless of course you find that an immediate 25 percent reduction in sodium doesn’t undermine your enjoyment of a particular food). Try this trick: Combine a reduced sodium version of a favorite product (e.g., vegetable soup) with a regular version in proportions that gradually favor the reduced sodium version. As time goes on, you won’t miss the salt.
7. Try a little romance: Sea salt and other secrets of the healthy kitchen.
Most sea salt has about the same level of sodium as other salts, but who doesn’t perk up with the mention of sea salt? It sounds like your favorite chef has taken charge of your dinner. You don’t need to spend the money on sea salt, just remember that we eat with our eyes and ears, not just our mouths—and we make decisions about how much we are likely to enjoy a given food long before it gets to our mouths. So instead of calling something “low sodium,” try language like “with a touch of sea salt,” “citrus-infused” or “garlic-scented,” and you’ll likely entice more people to taste and enjoy reduced sodium dishes. Finally, for those who think “low sodium” is the exact opposite of a compelling, positive message, remember that there is a big difference between well-prepared low-sodium foods and badly executed low-sodium foods. Bad cooking is just bad cooking, independent of sodium levels.
8. Target high-volume sodium sources: Prioritize your efforts.
Know which ingredients and individual foods are high in sodium, and eat them sparingly. Understand which categories of foods contribute the most sodium to our diets through repeated daily and weekly consumption. Salt is ubiquitous in the American diet, but this top 10 list of food sources of sodium in the U.S. diet is a good place to focus. The list is based on the combination of each item’s sodium content and the frequency of consumption. (2) Choose carefully when buying foods in these categories and/or eat less of these items:
- Meat pizza
- White bread
- Processed cheese
- Hot dogs
- Spaghetti with sauce
- Cooked rice
- White rolls
- Flour tortillas
9. Scan the label: Look for foods with less than 300 milligrams of sodium per serving.
Canned, boxed, frozen, and prepared foods can be high in sodium. Check the label for sodium amounts and choose foods that have less than 300 milligrams per serving. But pay attention to serving sizes, as they are often unrealistically small. A good rule of thumb for label reading is to look for no more than one milligram of sodium per one calorie of food. You may be surprised to find foods that are high in sodium but that don’t list “salt” in the ingredients. That’s because there are other forms of sodium used in food processing, and these all contribute to the total amount of sodium listed in the Nutrition Facts. Examples of these ingredients include monosodium glutamate, sodium citrate, sodium bicarbonate, and sodium alginate.
10. Compare, compare, compare: Sodium levels vary widely for the same or similar grocery items.
Compare brands of processed food, including breads, cured meats, cheeses, snack foods, and other foods, choosing those with the lowest levels of sodium that still taste good. You’ll find that there’s a surprising degree of variation from brand to brand, since some food manufacturers have already made great strides toward cutting the sodium levels in their products—and others never added as much sodium in the first place.
11. Watch out for hidden sodium: Looks—and taste—can be deceiving.
“Fresh” and “natural” meats and poultry may be injected with salt solutions as part of their processing, and manufacturers are not required to list the sodium content on the label. The best way to find out whether your favorite brand has been treated with a salt solution is to ask the grocer or butcher, or to call the toll-free consumer hotline on the product’s label. Some foods that are high in sodium may not taste especially salty, such as breakfast cereals, bakery muffins, energy drinks, and sports drinks.
12. Scan the menu, speak to your server: Seek low-salt menu options when dining out.
At the upper end of the spectrum, some chain restaurant and fast-food meals can top 5,000–6,000 milligrams of sodium per serving. It is common to find sandwiches and fast-food entrées with 2,000–2,500 milligrams of sodium per serving—as much as or more than a day’s recommended sodium intake. With foodservice (or food away from home) now accounting for nearly 50 percent of the consumer food dollar, both foodservice and food manufacturing—together with consumers and home cooks—need to be part of the solution to the sodium reduction challenge. Some tips for consumers: Sodium levels can vary widely from one dish to another and from one restaurant to another. Check restaurant websites for sodium information before you head out, or ask your server to steer you to low-salt choices. Save high-salt choices for very limited special occasions. Increasingly, chain restaurants are responding to calls for sodium reduction, so watch for news about such initiatives by your favorite restaurant group.
13. Farming for flavor: A new health imperative.
We should recognize that the national conversation about salt and sodium should not be just about salty taste and sodium reduction, but about flavor in our foods in general. For much of the 20th century, our national food and agricultural focus has been on quantity and value—and quality often as a function of consistency, appearance, safety, convenience, and shelf life. If natural flavor sometimes suffered, there was always fat (often saturated fats and trans fats), sugar, and salt to take up the slack—all high-impact, low-cost flavor enhancers that most people love. But at a time when we have “over-delivered” on the promise of affordable calories, and both salt and sugar (and all refined carbohydrates) are turning out to have serious negative health consequences, we need to refocus our attention on enhancing natural flavors. As a practical matter, this means growing more flavorful tomatoes at the same time we try to reduce the sodium in tomato soup.
14. Know your seasons, and, even better, your local farmer.
Shop for raw ingredients with maximum natural flavor, thereby avoiding the need to add as much (if any) sodium. Seek out peak-of-season produce from farmers’ markets and your local supermarket.
One of the easiest ways to reduce the need for added salt is through the use of ingredients such as spices, dried and fresh herbs, roots (such as garlic and ginger), citrus, vinegars, and wine. From black pepper, cinnamon and turmeric to fresh basil, chile peppers and lemon juice, these flavor enhancers create excitement on the palate—and can do it with less sodium.
16. Go nuts for healthy fats in the kitchen.
As chefs and home cooks know, fat is a great carrier and enhancer of flavor. Using the right healthy fats—from roasted nuts and avocados to olive, canola, soybean, and other oils—can help make up for any flavor loss from using less salt. Some healthy fats contribute their own flavors (think peanut butter and extra virgin olive oil), while other fats help to juice up flavor in pan searing and frying. For creative cooks, roasted nuts ground with spices extend and leverage small amounts of salt, such as in the Middle Eastern spice mixture.
Umami (pronounced oo-MAH-me), or savoriness, is the so-called “fifth taste” that in recent years sensory scientists have brought into the mainstream of academic research. Foods that are naturally high in a compound called “L-glutamate” trigger our “umami” taste receptors. Cooked chicken, fish, beef, and soybeans are naturally high in umami, as are mushrooms, tomatoes, seaweed, carrots, and Chinese cabbage. Incorporating these foods into meals can add a delicious depth of flavor without adding salt. Some foods that are high in umami are also high in sodium, including soy sauce, fish sauce, aged cheeses, miso, and anchovy paste. The cook’s best strategy: Use these ingredients in small amounts instead of adding salt, reducing the overall sodium in the dish. Check out these two recipes from the Culinary Institute of America that boost “umami”:
Take the time to learn some simple cooking techniques that can make your cooking less reliant on sodium. Searing and sautéing foods in a pan builds flavor (try searing umami-rich mushrooms in a hot pan with oil, and now you have a double flavor-building impact!). Roasting brings out the natural sweetness of many vegetables and the savoriness of fish and chicken. Steaming and microwaving tend to dilute flavors; perk up steamed dishes with a finishing drizzle of flavorful oil and a squeeze of citrus.
19. Wait! Be careful how you spend that sodium budget.
Save your “sodium budget” to enhance the flavors of produce, whole grains, nuts and legumes, and other healthy ingredients versus “overspending” it on salty snacks, heavily processed food, high-sodium fast foods, and other foods that we should be consuming in smaller amounts. We all love treats, and most of us have to eat on the run occasionally (that’s why they call it “fast food”). But if we do this too often in a way that “blows” our sodium budget, we come up short without enough tools to enhance the flavors of healthy, everyday cooking. The best intentions to reduce sodium are definitely going to run aground when too many high-sodium ingredients are aggregated in the same dish. Rethink that double bacon cheeseburger or the breakfast special with ham and sausage.
Pickles, capers, cured meats, grated aged cheeses, mustard, catsup, soy sauce, hot sauce, smoked fish, and other condiments and specialty foods all bring added satisfaction to the table. There is no need to give up condiments, which in many cases represent culinary traditions that are centuries old. In some cases, reduced sodium versions of these are now available; in other cases, we can just use them more sparingly.
21. Go global: Discover a world of ideas for flavor development.
Look to global culinary traditions—from Europe and the Mediterranean, Latin America, Asia and Africa—for healthy ideas to transform fruits, vegetables, and other healthy ingredients into exciting flavors and meals. Because many of these world culinary traditions build up flavor in such novel, complex, and intriguing ways, cooks are under less pressure to use as much sodium. Sometimes these flavors will appear in the U.S. or their native countries in higher sodium versions, but the culinary ideas for lower sodium strategies are still there, embedded in traditional cultural approaches to flavor development that go way beyond fat, salt, and sugar (our all-too-frequent default flavor enhancers in the U.S.). Two international recipe suggestions are:
Avoid “double salting” your foods when cooking, and look for ways to pair salted flavors with unsalted or under-salted foods, especially fresh produce. If you are adding a little cheese to your salad, you don’t need much or any salt in your dressing. If you are adding a ham bone to a soup pot, lighten up on the sodium for the rest of the soup. In a sandwich, try adding sliced cucumber instead of pickles. A pot of brown rice or whole grain pasta doesn’t need to be salted if you are serving it with other adequately seasoned items or sauces. And an adequately seasoned crust or condiment may lessen the need for salting the rest of the dish.
23. Rinse, wash, and dilute: You can easily cut some of the excess sodium in processed foods with no loss of flavor.
Draining and rinsing canned foods can dramatically cut their sodium levels—in the case of canned beans, cooks can cut 40 percent of the sodium with this trick. When making soup, dilute reduced sodium chicken broth with water or wine instead of using it full strength, and float in some additional vegetables and herbs.
24. Whole grains: Beyond bread and sandwiches.
Collectively, because we eat so much of it, bread is one of the largest contributors of sodium to our diets. Even whole grain bread, while a healthier choice than white, can contain considerable sodium. But only part of the sodium in bread is for taste: Much of it is used to help the bread-making process and preserve the final results. You can skip that extra salt when you use these marvelous whole grains by themselves. Try a Mediterranean-inspired whole grain salad with chopped vegetables, nuts, and legumes, perhaps a small amount of cheese, herbs and spices, and healthy oils and vinegar or citrus. You can enjoy many of the same flavors you love in a sandwich, but in a delicious new form that has much less sodium. For breakfast, cook up steel cut oats, farro, or other intact whole grains with a generous amount of fresh or dried fruit, and you can skip the toast (and the extra sodium).
25. Kick the “auto-salt” habit: Taste before you salt.
Too many of us have the habit of reaching for the salt shaker as soon as our plates are put in front of us. Try taking the salt shaker off the table and making it available “upon request only.” Always, always taste your food before you salt: Maybe you don’t need the extra sodium. And in the kitchen, add salt late in the cooking process. Foods release their flavors (and salt, in the case of salted ingredients) during the cooking process, and “palate fatigue” on the part of the cook can cause over-salting if this is undertaken too early.
Given how vital sodium reduction is, and how embedded sodium is in our food supply, culinary techniques, flavor strategies, manufacturing methods, and marketing assumptions, it is essential that we conduct additional research to shed more light on which sodium reduction strategies are most effective. The challenges here are far more complex than they were for trans fats, which are more easily isolated and replaced in the food supply. In addition to food science and engineering fixes to the high-sodium problem, we need to engage chefs, menu developers, consumer opinion researchers, and a wide range of flavor experts in developing and pursuing key research questions. With the benefit of this research, we will be better positioned to create reduced sodium flavors and food choices that consumers find not just acceptable, but compelling.
1. Institute of Medicine.. April 20, 2010.
2. Grocery Manufacturers Association.. Washington, D.C., 2008.
© The President and Fellows of Harvard College and The Culinary Institute of America

American PoetryIf we define poetry as the heart of man expressed in beautiful language,
we shall not say that we have no national poetry. True, America has
produced no Shakespeare and no Milton, but we have an inheritance in all
English literature; and many poets in America have followed in the
footsteps of their literary British forefathers.
Puritan life was severe. It was warfare, and manual labor of a most
exhausting type, and loneliness, and devotion to a strict sense of duty.
It was a life in which pleasure was given the least place and duty the
greatest. Our Puritan ancestors thought music and poetry dangerous,
if not actually sinful, because they made men think of this world rather
than of heaven. When Anne Bradstreet wrote our first known American
poems, she was expressing English thought; "The tenth muse" was not
animated by the life around her, but was living in a dream of the land
she had left behind; her poems are faint echoes of the poetry of England.
After time had identified her with life in the new world, she wrote
"Contemplations," in which her English nightingales are changed to
crickets and her English gilli-flowers to American blackberry vines.
The truly representative poetry of colonial times is Michael
Wigglesworth's "Day of Doom. This is the real heart of the Puritan,
his conscience, in imperfect rhyme. It fulfills the first part of our
definition, but shows by its lack of beautiful style that both elements
are necessary to produce real poetry.
Philip Freneau was the first American who sought to express his life in
poetry. The test of beauty of language again excludes from real poetry
some of his expressions and leaves us a few beautiful lyrics, such as
"The Wild Honeysuckle," in which the poet sings his love of American
nature. With them American poetry may be said to begin.
The first historical event of national importance was the American
Revolution. Amid the bitter years of want, of suffering, and of war; few
men tried to write anything beautiful. Life was harsh and stirring and
this note was echoed in all the literature. As a result we have
narrative and political poetry, such as "The Battle of the Kegs" and "A
Fable," dealing almost entirely with events and aiming to arouse military
ardor. In "The Ballad of Nathan Hale," the musical expression of
bravery, pride, and sympathy raises the poem so far above the rhymes of
their period that it will long endure as the most memorable poetic
expression of the Revolutionary period.
Poetry was still a thing of the moment, an avocation, not dignified by
receiving the best of a man. With William Cullen Bryant came a change.
He told our nation that in the new world as well as in the old some men
should live for the beautiful. Everything in nature spoke to him in
terms of human life. Other poets saw the re1ation between their own
lives and the life of the flowers and the birds, but Bryant constantly
expressed this relationship. The concluding stanza of "To a Waterfowl"
is the most perfect example of this characteristic, but it underlies also
the whole thought of his youthful poem "Thanatopsis" (A View of Death).
If we could all read the lives of our gentians and bobolinks as he did,
there would be more true poetry in America. Modern thinkers urge us to
step outside of ourselves into the lives of others and by our imagination
to share their emotions; this is no new ambition in America; since Bryant
in "The Crowded Street" analyzes the life in the faces he sees.
Until the early part of the nineteenth century American poetry dealt
mainly with the facts of history and the description of nature. A new
element of fancy is prominent in Joseph Rodman Drake's "The Culprit Fay."
It dances through a long narrative with the delicacy of the fay himself.
Edgar Allan Poe brought into our poetry somber sentiment and musical
expression. Puritan poetry was somber, but it was almost devoid of
sentiment. Poe loved sad beauty and meditated on the sad things in life.
Many of his poems lament the loss of some fair one. "To Helen," "Annabel
Lee" "Lenore," and "To One In Paradise" have the theme, while in "The
Raven" the poet is seeking solace for the loss of Lenore. "Eulalie--A
Song" rises, on the other hand to intense happiness. With Poe the sound
by which his idea was expressed was as important as the thought itself.
He knew how to make the sound suit the thought, as in "The Raven" and
"The Bells." One who understands no English can grasp the meaning of the
different sections from the mere sound, so clearly distinguishable are
the clashing of the brass and the tolling of the iron bells. If we
return to our definition of poetry as an expression of the heart of a
man, we shall find the explanation of these peculiarities: Poe was a man
of moods and possessed the ability to express these moods in appropriate
The contrast between the emotion of Poe and the calm spirit of the man
who followed him is very great. In Henry Wadsworth Longfellow American
poetry reached high-water mark. Lacadio Hearn in his "Interpretations
of Literature" says: "Really I believe that it is a very good test of any
Englishman's ability to feel poetry, simply to ask him, `Did you like
Longfellow when you were a boy?' If he says `No,' then it is no use to
talk to him on the subject of poetry at all, however much he might be
able to tell you about quantities and metres." No American has in equal
degree won the name of "household poet." If this term is correctly
understood, it sums up his merits more succinctly than can any other
Longfellow dealt largely with men and women and the emotions common to us
all. Hiawatha conquering the deer and bison, and hunting in despair for
food where only snow and ice abound; Evangeline faithful to her father
and her lover, and relieving suffering in the rude hospitals of a new
world; John Alden fighting the battle between love and duty; Robert of
Sicily learning the lesson of humility; Sir Federigo offering his last
possession to the woman he loved; Paul Revere serving his country in time
of need; the monk proving that only a sense of duty done can bring
happiness: all these and more express the emotions which we know are true
in our own lives. In his longer narrative poems he makes the legends of
Puritan life real to us; he takes English folk-lore and makes us see
Othere talking to Arthur, and the Viking stealing his bride. His short
poems are even better known than his longer narratives. In them he
expressed his gentle, sincere love of the young, the suffering, and the
sorrowful. In the Sonnets he showed; that deep appreciation of European
literature which made noteworthy his teaching at Harvard and his
He believed that he was assigned a definite task in the world which he
described as follows in his last poem:
"As comes the smile to the lips,
The foam to the surge;
So come to the Poet his songs,
All hitherward blown
From the misty realm, that belongs
To the vast unknown.
His, and not his, are the lays
He sings; and their fame
Is his, and not his; and the praise
And the pride of a name.
For voices pursue him by day
And haunt him by night,
And he listens and needs must obey,
When the Angel says: 'Write!'
John Greenleaf Whittier seems to suffer by coming in such close proximity
to Longfellow. Genuine he was, but his spirit was less buoyant than
Longfellow's and he touches our hearts less. Most of his early poems
were devoted to a current political issue. They aimed to win converts to
the cause of anti-slavery. Such poems always suffer in time in
comparison with the song of a man who sings because "the heart is so full
that a drop overfills it." Whittier's later poems belong more to this
class and some of them speak to-day to our emotions as well as to our
intellects. "The Hero" moves us with a desire to serve mankind, and the
stirring tone of "Barbara Frietchie" arouses our patriotism by its
picture of the same type of bravery. In similar vein is "Barclay of
Ury," which must have touched deeply the heart of the Quaker poet. "The
Pipes of Lucknow" is dramatic in its intense grasp of a climactic hour
and loses none of its force in the expression. We can actually hear the
skirl of the bagpipes. Whittier knew the artists of the world and talked
to us about Raphael and Burns with clear-sighted, affectionate interest.
His poems show varied characteristics; the love of the sterner aspects of
nature, modified by the appreciation of the humble flower; the conscience
of the Puritan, tinged with sympathy for the sorrowful; the steadfastness
of the Quaker, stirred by the fire of the patriot.
The poetry of Ralph Waldo Emerson is marked by serious contemplation
rather than by warmth of emotional expression. In Longfellow the appeal
is constantly to a heart which is not disassociated from a brain; in
Emerson the appeal is often to the intellect alone. We recognize the
force of the lesson in "The Titmouse," even if it leaves us less devoted
citizens than does "The Hero" and less capable women than does
"Evangeline." He reaches his highest excellence when he makes us feel as
well as understand a lesson, as in "The Concord Hymn" and "Forbearance."
If we could all write on the tablets of our hearts that single stanza,
forbearance would be a real factor in life. And it is to this poet whom
we call unemotional that we owe this inspiring quatrain:
"So nigh is grandeur to our dust,
So near is God to man,
When duty whispers low, Thou must,
The youth replies, I can!"
James Russell Lowell was animated by a well-defined purpose which he
described in the following lines:
"It may be glorious to write
Thoughts that make glad the two or three
High souls like those far stars that come in sight
Once in a century.
But better far it is to speak
One simple word which, now and then
Shall waken their free nature in the weak
And friendless sons of men.
To write some earnest verse or line
Which, seeking not the praise of art,
Shall make a clearer faith and manhood shine
In the untutored heart."
His very accomplishments made it difficult for him to reach this aim,
since his poetry does not move "the untutored heart" so readily as does
that of Longfellow or Whittier. It is, on the whole, too deeply burdened
with learning and too individual in expression to fulfil his highest
desire. Of his early poems the most generally known is probably "The
Vision of Sir Launfal," in which a strong moral purpose is combined with
lines of beautiful nature description:
"And what is so rare as a day in June?
Then, if ever, come perfect days.
Two works by which he will be permanently remembered show a deeper and
more effective Lowell. "The Biglow Papers" are the most successful of
all the American poems which attempt to improve conditions by means of
humor. Although they refer in the main to the situation at the time of
the Mexican War, they deal with such universal political traits that they
may be applied to almost any age. They are written in a Yankee dialect
which, it is asserted, was never spoken, but which enhances the humor, as
in "What Mr. Robinson Thinks." Lowell's tribute to Lincoln occurs in the
Ode which he wrote to commemorate the Harvard students who enlisted in
the Civil War. After dwelling on the search for truth which should be
the aim of every college student, he turns to the delineation of
Lincoln's character in a eulogy of great beauty. Clear in analysis, far-
sighted in judgment, and loving in sentiment, he expresses that opinion
of Lincoln which has become a part of the web of American thought. His
is no hurried judgment, but the calm statement of opinion which is to-day
accepted by the world:
"They all are gone, and, standing like a tower,
Our children shall behold his fame,
The kindly-earnest, brave, foreseeing man,
Sagacious, patient, dreading, praise, not blame,
Now birth of our new soil, the first American."
With Oliver Wendell Holmes comes the last of this brief American list of
honor. No other American has so combined delicacy with the New England
humor. We should be poorer by many a smile without "My Aunt" and "The
Deacon's Masterpiece." But this is not his entire gift. "The Chambered
Nautilus" strikes the chord of noble sentiment sounded in the last stanza
of "Thanatopsis" and it will continue to sing in our hearts "As the swift
seasons roll." There is in his poems the smile and the sigh of the well-
"And if I should live to be
The last leaf upon the tree
In the Spring.
Let them smile; as I do now;
As the old forsaken bough
Where I cling."
And is this all? Around these few names does all the fragrance of
American poetry hover? In the hurry, prosperity, and luxury of modern
life is the care if the flower of poetry lost? Surely not. The last
half of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth have
brought many beautiful flowers of poetry and hints of more perfect
blossoms. Lanier has sung of the life of the south he loved; Whitman and
Miller have stirred us with enthusiasm for the progress of the nation;
Field and Riley have made us laugh and cry in sympathy; Aldrich, Sill,
Van Dyke, Burroughs, and Thoreau have shared with us their hoard of
beauty. Among the present generation may there appear many men and women
whose devotion to the delicate flower shall be repaid by the gratitude of
Contributed by Carhart, Margaret Spraque
22 June 2003

The Matter at Issue: The Throne of France
The Hundred Years War was fought largely over who would be the king of France. The English kings, who had originally been French nobles that invaded and conquered England in 1066, still held lands in France. The English lands in France had long been viewed uncomfortably by the French king. Through the 13th century, strong French kings had reclaimed French lands held by the English kings. By the early 14th century, three events came together. First, the English kings noted that one more push by the French would deive the English completely out of France. Second, the French were entering a period of weak kings. Third, the English throne was now occupied by the young, vigorous, able and (ultimately) long lived Edward III. In any other circumstances it would appear absurd for the English king to come up with the idea of claiming the French throne in order to protect English lands in France. But Edward III was bold and, in one of those uniquely Medieval ironies, he had law and custom on his side. The English claim to the French throne was strong, as were the English armies and Edward IIIs resolve. The resulting war outlived Edward, and his great grandson, Henry V, came within a hair of actually taking the French throne.
The items below explain the situation in rather more detail.
Historical Kings of France
Historical Kings of England
The English Position of the Throne of France
The French Ultimatum
A Summary of Overlapping Claims to Various Thrones

And as good as today's beginning stages of deflation may feel, especially when filling up at a service station or shopping for a house, economists warn that there is a high price to pay down the road and that current monetary policy is only raising that price.
Of course, not all price reductions are created equal. A price drop that stems primarily from an increase in technological efficiency is not deflation; it's progress. Deflation is a fall in prices that stems from a shrinking money supply, just as inflation is a price hike that stems from an increase in the supply of money.
Deflation ramps up when people borrow to make a big purchase on the assumption that what they are buying will be worth more later. But if prices fall, the loan will have to be repaid in dollars that are worth more than the dollars they borrowed, making the debt more onerous. As a result, when people expect falling prices, they become less willing to spend, and in particular less willing to borrow. And when that happens, the economy may stay depressed because people expect deflation, and deflation may continue because the economy remains depressed. It's a nasty cycle and it can often be traced back to the central bank's balance sheet expansion.
Deflation is the one thing that a leveraged economy can't handle, said Steve Blitz, chief economist at ITG Investment Research. The implication on the whole economy is potentially ruinous. The idea that every time the stock markets have some kind of a hiccup and they [the Fed policymakers] need to rush in with some sort of quantitative ease is a dangerous road for them to go on.
Deflation is always a risk if you engage in a policy of inflation, said Albert Lu, managing director and chief portfolio manager of WB Advisors.
The problem with the addiction to money-printing is that it can't stop without dire -- albeit in the long-term healthy -- short-term economic consequences, he said.
To jump-start the economy, the central bank would increase the money supply and bank credit to support certain sectors or projects. That's what the Fed did after the dot-com bubble of 1995-2000 burst. The problem is that once the Fed stops the infusion of additional credit and money, deflation rapidly takes hold. It then takes an ever-increasing amount of new money creation to achieve a temporary suppression of deflation's symptoms.
Inflation-sustained projects are unsustainable because the expansion rests on government fiat, not economic fundamentals like supply and demand. Take the government's determination to promote home ownership. That public policy was advanced with easy money, especially during Alan Greenspan's leadership of the Fed, compulsory lending to unqualified borrowers and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac buying tranches of subprime mortgages. Home ownership boomed. And then it collapsed. Home prices still haven't recovered: U.S. home prices fell in March (the latest data available), ending the first quarter at the lowest levels since the housing crisis began in mid-2006, according to Standard & Poor's Case-Shiller home-price indexes. Prices are down roughly 35 percent from their peak in the second quarter of 2006.
Essentially, as soon as the government stops the expansion, you are going to hit one of these deflationary corrections with all of the nasty business cycles that accompany it, Lu said.
And often how the government reacts to that is with additional stimulus. For a third year in a row, the U.S. is seeing an economic slowdown and in response, policymakers could be unveiling policy sequels such as: Fiscal Stimulus 4, Operation Twist 2 or Quantitative Easing 3.
They are basically keeping the thing going by continuously adding money and credit, Lu said. This is just delaying the correction we need.
We've been prolonging the agony, and the final correction will be much worse than it had to be, Lu said.
Let Them Fail
The depression of 1920-21 shows why the Fed should sit on its collective hands at their June Federal Open Market Committee meeting.
From the spring of 1920 to the summer of 1921, nominal gross domestic product fell by 23.9 percent, wholesale prices by 40.8 percent and the consumer price index dropped by 8.3 percent. Meanwhile, unemployment topped out at about 14 percent from a pre-bust level of as low as 2 percent.
In response, the administration of Warren G. Harding balanced the budget and the Fed tightened money supply, pushing up short-term rates in mid-depression to as high as 8.13 percent.
Harding also decided to let the ailing businesses fail. Then something wonderful happened: The economy purged itself and by 1923, the nation's unemployment rate fell back to 3.2 percent.
There was no government bailout, no rock-bottom interest rates, no QE, no stimulus of any kind. Yet the depression ended.
We actually need a deflation. Believe it or not, it's actually healthy, Lu said. However painful it is, deflation is the natural consequence of prior inflation and is a necessary step in the economic recovery.
Trying to avoid it through additional Fed action will prolong the depression, Lu said.

In fact, the United States apparently just emerged from the hottest spring on record.
The period between June 2011 and May of this year was the warmest on record since NOAA record keeping began in 1985. Aside from Washington, every state experienced higher-than-average temperatures during that period, which also featured the second-warmest summer and fourth-warmest winter in almost 28 years.
The nation's average temperature during those 12 months hovered at 56 degrees Fahrenheit, reportedly 3.2 degrees above the long-term average, surpassing the previous record, which was just set in April, in an analysis of temperatures between May 2011 and April 2012. The warmer-than-average conditions persisted through the winter and spring, resulting in a limited snowfall that the Rutgers Global Snow Lab reports was the third-smallest on record for the contiguous U.S.
The rising temperatures may have altered precipitation patterns as well, according to NOAA. While the country as a whole actually experienced a drier spring than usual, the West Coast, Northern Plains and Upper Midwest regions were simultaneously wetter than average.
On a more concerning note, the prevalence of natural disasters, such as the disastrous tornado in Joplin, Mo., and the massive, hurricane-caused flooding in Vermont, that plagued the country over the past year were also far form usual. The U.S. Climate Extreme Index, which tracks extremes in temperatures, precipitation, drought and tropical cyclones, reached 44 percent this past spring. That's twice the average value.
The NOAA report is not the only recent analysis to note the prevalence, and consequences, of rising temperatures. On Thursday, NASA reported that scientists have discovered unprecedented blooms of plant life beneath the waters of the Arctic Ocean. While that certainly does not seem like cause for concern, NASA noted it was likely caused by a thinning of the Arctic Ocean's three-foot thick layer of ice, allowing the sun to penetrate that ice to foster plant life under the sea.
A continuous rise in summer temperatures is expected to triple the number of heat-related deaths in the U.S. by the end of the century, the Natural Resources Defense Council reported last month. In an analysis of peer-reviewed data, the organization said summer temperatures could rise by 4 to 11 degrees Fahrenheit by that time due to human-induced climate change, which could increase the number of summer heat-related deaths from 1,300 to 4,600 a year.

Education:Gala Celebrations 4 Telecommunications
Grade 9 / World History / Technology
Time Required for Completed Lesson
30 minutes for introduction and 40 minutes for presentations, time will vary based on size of class; work can be completed in class or out of class
6.2.12.C.1.e, 6.2.12.D.2.e, 6.2.12.C.3.d, 6.2.12.C.4.d, 6.2.12.D.5.c, 6.2.12.D.6.a
Common Core State Standards
SL.9-10.4. Present information, findings, and supporting evidence clearly, concisely, and logically such that listeners can follow the line of reasoning and the organization, development, substance, and style are appropriate to purpose, audience, and task. SL.9-10.5. Make strategic use of digital media (e.g., textual, graphical, audio, visual, and interactive elements) in presentations to enhance understanding of findings, reasoning, and evidence and to add interest. SL.9-10.6. Adapt speech to a variety of contexts and tasks, demonstrating command of formal English when indicated or appropriate.
Computer lab or laptop cart if working on assignment in class; lap top with projector required for presentations
Open class with a discussion about telecommunications and celebrations. How do people communication? How has communication changed? How do we celebrate milestones in our lives – births, marriages, birthdays? Share with students article - Happy Anniversary: First email Sent with an Attachment Turns 20! (See resources below for link) Brainstorm with class a celebration honoring this telecommunications milestone.
Divide classes into small groups – 2 or 3 students in each group. Groups can be assigned telecommunications milestones or pick their own milestone. Each group should have a different milestone. Milestones can included Gutenberg’s improved Printing Press, the Optical Telegraph, the American Postal Service, the Pony Express, the Stagecoach, the Telegraph, Morse Code, the Telephone, the Radio, the Electronic Television, the Internet, Pagers, Cellular Devices, Social Media Websites, and E-mail. The student groups will work as party planners. Their task is to plan and present a Gala Celebration honoring their telecommunications milestone. The plan can be presented in a PowerPoint or Prezi format. The plan must include the following: a meaningful date and location for the celebration, an invitation, decorations, guest list (of living and deceased dignitaries), basic menu, entertainment and party favors. Student groups are given two weeks to complete their presentations. (See resources section below for links)
Be sure to pair students with a higher level learner to help her/him with activity. Be prepared to share additional notes with students and if necessary extend due dates.
Group Project and Presentation Rubrics
Language Arts (presentation skills, research skills)
Review and return rubrics to students. Decorate the classroom or bulletin boards with printed invitations for the Gala Celebrations.

Written into History
Pulitzer Prize Reporting of the Twentieth Century from The New York Times
By Anthony Lewis (Editor)
(Times Books, Hardcover, 9780805068498, 352pp.)
Publication Date: October 2001
Other Editions of This Title: Hardcover
With each news day, history unfolds as steadfast journalists uncover facts and public opinion. Drawn from the New York Times's archive of an unparalleled seventy-nine Pulitzer Prizes, Written Into History offers a fascinating record of the twentieth century.
The Times's award-winning reports range from Antarctic dispatches on the Byrd expedition to the eyewitness account of the atomic bomb, from the First Amendment battle to publish the Pentagon Papers to the personal narrative of an interracial friendship. Pulitzer Prize winner Anthony Lewis culled through the newspaper's most acclaimed writing to chronicle life and history as it was happening, with such highlights as Otto Tolischus on Hitler, David Halberstam on Vietnam, J. Anthony Lukas on hippies, and Anna Quindlen on AIDS.
Lewis tells the stories behind the stories, describing journalism's changing role in the world. For armchair historians and aspiring reporters, this is a rich and memorable portrait of a century by the men and women who most artfully observed it.
Two-time Pulitzer-Prize-winning journalist Anthony Lewis is the author of Make No Law and the bestseller Gideon's Trumpet. Among the highlights of his nearly five decades of writing and reporting for the New York Times, he served as the Times's London bureau chief for eight years and contributes the twice-weekly "Abroad at Home" column to the paper's op-ed page.
"The kind of even-shaping journalism pioneered by Pulitzer is on display in Written into History, a collection of Pulitzer Prize reporting from the New York Times. Editor Anthony Lewis chronicles changes in the attitude of the press toward the presidency and government, as reflected in the kind of reporting that won the prize over the years and the trend toward recognizing more analytical writing. He also provides background on the history of the Pulitzer Prize and the arduous decision-making process. The selected award-winning articles (the Times has won more Pulitzers than any other American newspaper) are sorted into the following categories: investigative reporting; dangerous stories that put reporters at risk; international news; public advocacy; criticism of the arts; science reporting; and biographical and human-interest stories. Among the topics are Russian slave-labor camps during the 1950s, the Pentagon Papers, the Vietnam War, and exploitation of illegal aliens in the U.S."—Vanessa Bush, Booklist
"Lewis (Gideon's Trumpet) a writer with the New York Times for nearly five decades and himself a two-time Pulitzer winner succeeds in presenting some of the world's best recent journalism . . . There are plenty of both prominent and almost-forgotten stories: 'Red' Smith on the near-bankruptcy of New York City in the 1970s, Max Frankel on Nixon's 1972 visit to China, Linda Greenhouse on failed Supreme Court nominee Robert Bork. Lewis's fine introductory essay describes the post-Vietnam transformation of American journalism. The war and Watergate, he contends, made the press more skeptical of those in power and more confrontational in tone. Pulitzer Prizes increasingly went to fearless reporters like David Halberstam, whose tragically prescient analysis, in 1963, of the worsening situation in Vietnam constitutes one of the highlights of this book . . . Another highlight is Lewis's own analysis of the Warren court, which moved aggressively to 'federalize' legal protections in the areas of civil rights and criminal due process. It's a paragon of accessible legal writing. Perhaps the best, and certainly the most important, piece in the collection is Mirta Ojito's unforgettable recent story of two Cuban immigrants, one black and one white and how race comes to define and divide the two friends once they move to Miami. The piece is everything great journalism should be: empathetic, unmistakably relevant and a challenge to our basic ideals. For anyone interested in recent history or journalism at its best, this book will prove worthwhile."—Publishers Weekly

What Is It?
Varicose veins occur when veins just below the skin's surface are damaged, become swollen and fill with too much blood.
Veins are the blood vessels that return blood to the heart. Arteries carry blood away from the heart to the rest of the body.
Varicose veins most commonly occur in the legs. In about 50% of cases, the condition runs in families, and probably is related to an inherited weakness in the veins' walls or the valves inside veins that keep blood from backing up.
Pregnancy is another common cause of varicose veins. During pregnancy, the volume of blood increases causing veins to expand. Also, occupations that require uninterrupted standing (waitresses and waiters, nurses, mothers with young children) may force leg veins and valves to work against gravity for hours, increasing the risk of pressure-related vein and valve damage. Garters also can increase the risk of varicose veins if their tight elastics slow blood flow in the legs.
Varicose veins are 2 to 3 times more common in women than men. Obese people are more likely to develop varicose veins.
Varicose veins can be associated with prior blood clots and damage to the deeper veins in one or both legs, a situation that sometimes can lead to chronic venous insufficiency. When this happens, the veins lose their ability to effectively move blood back to the heart. This can cause significant leg swelling and skin sores or ulcers.
In the legs, varicose veins commonly are found along the inside of the leg, at the ankles and at the back of the calf. The affected veins look blue, swollen or stretched out, kinked or twisted.
In some people, varicose veins do not cause any symptoms. However, other people may experience one or more of the following:
- A dull ache in the legs
- A feeling of pressure or heaviness in the legs
- Swollen feet and ankles
- Itching skin near the damaged veins
In more severe cases of chronic venous insufficiency, a slowing of blood flow through the vein can lead to localized skin changes, including dryness, a rash or brownish discoloration and open sores (ulcers). Slow blood flow also can cause a clot to form inside the affected vein. This condition is called thrombosis.
In general, symptoms of varicose veins are worse at the end of the day, especially after periods of prolonged standing. Some women also find that their symptoms are more intense during the days before their menstrual periods, and during pregnancy.
Your doctor will ask you about your symptoms and about your family history of varicose veins. He or she also will ask about your lifestyle, especially the number of hours that you spend on your feet. In women, your doctor will ask about your pregnancy history and about the tightness of elastics on the socks or stockings you wear.
Your doctor can diagnose varicose veins with a simple physical examination. In most cases, no special tests are necessary.
Varicose veins are a long-term problem, but symptoms can come and go. If you are pregnant and experiencing severe problems with varicose veins, your symptoms will improve after delivery. However, your varicose veins probably will not disappear totally, and you can expect symptoms to return during future pregnancies.
You can help to prevent varicose veins by maintaining a normal weight and by avoiding situations where you must stand for prolonged periods. Even with these preventive measures, however, you still may develop varicose veins if this condition tends to run in your family.
If you already have varicose veins, you can prevent symptom flare-ups by periodically lying down or sitting down with your legs elevated above the level of your chest. Some physicians also recommend that you wear support stockings or more specialized compression stockings when you walk or stand for long periods of time. The stockings prevent blood from pooling in the veins, and prevent strain on the valves and leg swelling.
Treatment for most people with mild symptoms of varicose veins includes:
- Elevating and supporting the legs periodically throughout the day
- Wearing compression stockings
For varicose veins that are close to the skin, dermatologists or vascular surgeons may offer sclerotherapy or laser therapy. Sclerotherapy involves injection of an irritating into the affected vein, causing the vein to scar and shut down. Laser therapy can be effective for the smallest varicose veins.
People with severe venous insufficiency can develop recurrent blood clots and skin ulcers. The traditional surgery is called vein stripping and ligation. In this surgical procedure, the abnormal veins are tied off and pulled out of the body through series of small cuts in the skin. Another surgical procedure, called ambulatory phlebectomy, also removes veins through small skin incisions, but it is less invasive than classic stripping and ligation.
Newer therapies include endovenous thermal ablation and transilluminated power phlebotomy (a modified form of ambulatory phlebotomy). Endovenous thermal ablation uses laser or high-frequency radio waves to heat the abnormal veins. These newer procedures appear to cause less scarring, with less "down time."
External laser therapy is reserved primarily for cosmetic removal of small, superficial, spider-like veins.
When to Call a Professional
Call your doctor whenever you have pain, swelling, skin ulcers or an unexplained area of bruising on your legs. New leg swelling, especially in just one leg, can be caused by a blood clot, which requires immediate treatment.
If you have varicose veins, call your doctor immediately if you develop an ulcer or a painful, black and blue area near a varicose vein or if you cut the skin over a varicose vein and you have trouble controlling the bleeding.
Varicose veins are a long-term problem, but their symptoms often can be controlled with leg elevation and therapeutic stockings.
Surgical procedures remove varicose veins permanently, but they leave scars, and they cannot prevent new varicose veins from forming.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
P.O. Box 30105
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105
American College of Surgeons (ACS)
633 North Saint Clair St.
Chicago, IL 60611-3211

Only 1% of all cancer cases in the U.S. are cancers of the testicle. But it is the most common form of cancer in young men. In 2012, it is estimated that there will be 8,600 new cases of testicular cancer, and that 360 men will die from this disease.
There are several risk factors for testicular cancer:
- Most cases happen in young men, typically 15-40 years of age. But older men may also develop the disease.
- Failure of one or both testicles to descend from within the body before birth (known as cryptorchidism). This raises the risk of cancer approximately ten-fold.
- If there is cancer in one testicle, the risk for cancer in the other testicle goes up.
- When a first-degree family member (father, brother or son) has been affected.
- Having Klinefelters syndrome (a congenital abnormality of chromosomes).
But in the majority of cases, there arent any risk factors present. And there is no evidence that injuring the testicle or getting a sexually transmitted disease (other than HIV) increases the risk of cancer.
If its detected early, testicular cancer responds exceptionally well to treatment. The survival rate for early-stage tumors is over 95%. Treatment is less effective if the diagnosis is delayed.
You should see your doctor right away if:
- You have pain in your testicle
- You notice new lumps
- Any of your testicles gets bigger
Some doctors recommend that young men do regular testicle self-exams. But there is no proof that self-exam leads to earlier diagnosis and better outcomes.

Gay and Lesbian Issues
The adolescent years are full of challenges, many related to sex and sexual identity. These issues can be especially difficult for teens who are (or think they may be) homosexual. Homosexual teens deserve the same understanding and respect as heterosexual teens, and it is important for everyone to know the facts about homosexuality. Here are the basics.
Each of us has a biological sex (we have a male or female body), a gender identity (we feel like a male or female), and a sexual orientation (we are attracted to males or females). Homosexuality refers to a person's sexual orientation; homosexual teen-agers have strong romantic or sexual feelings for a person of the same sex. Heterosexual teen-agers are attracted to people of the opposite sex, and bisexual teens are attracted to people of both sexes.
The word "gay" is used to describe both men and women who are homosexual, with the word "lesbian" specifically referring to a homosexual woman. It is estimated that 10 percent of the population in the United States and throughout the world is lesbian or gay.
Although scientists don't know why some people are homosexual and others are not, most believe that homosexuality is a normal variation of sexual orientation. It may be genetic, result from natural substances (hormones) in the body, be influenced by the environment before or after birth, or, most likely, several of these things working in combination. Homosexual teens are found in all types of families. Homosexuality is not caused by "bad parenting." If your teen is gay, it is not because of anything you or anyone else did.
Homosexuality also is not something a person chooses, nor is it an illness that can be cured. According to the American Psychiatric Association, so-called therapies such as "reparative therapy" and "transformational ministry" don't work and actually can be harmful, causing guilt and anxiety in homosexual teens.
Not all teen-agers who are attracted to members of the same sex are homosexual. Many teens experiment with their sexuality during adolescence, in much the same way that they experiment with clothing, body art or music. This brief sexual experimentation is thought to be a normal part of sexual development. For homosexual teens, the attraction to people of the same sex is stronger and longer lasting.
Back to top
Every family is different. While one parent may find out by chance that a teen is homosexual, others may hear directly from their teen in person, in a letter or by a phone call. When a teen tells other people that he is homosexual, it's called "coming out." Although this process sometimes can be difficult or painful for families, it also can be a time of tremendous growth. It is important to remember that all teens need their family's support and acceptance, especially when they are dealing with sensitive issues.
Back to top
"Coming out" can be scary and painful, and parents need to reassure their children that they will not be loved any less for sharing the truth about themselves. If your teen tells you he is gay, let him know that you love him unconditionally, and accept him no matter what.
Show your teen that you care by learning more about homosexuality. Read books on the subject or check out reputable Web sites (such as www.pflag.org). Talk to some adults you know who are gay. Look for organizations or support groups in your community that can give you information on homosexuality. It will be easier for you to support your teen when you know more and are comfortable with the subject.
Parents may worry about how friends, neighbors and family will react to their teen's homosexuality. It is usually best not to share any information without your teen-ager's permission. Unfortunately, prejudice against homosexuals is widespread, mostly due to ignorance and fear. When your teen is ready for you to let others know, you should talk with them about your teen's sexual orientation and help them to understand, by using what you have learned.
Back to top
Growing up as a homosexual in a mostly heterosexual society often is not easy. Gay and lesbian adolescents sometimes must cope with unfair, prejudiced, and even violent behavior at school, at home and in the community. They may feel fear or be alone and unsupported. This can push some teens to use drugs and alcohol, engage in risky sexual behavior, or even attempt suicide. It is important that homosexual teens feel supported by their parents and always able to talk openly with them about these issues.
Overall, most gay and lesbian youth grow up to be well-adjusted and happy adults, with successful careers and family lives.
Books for parents of the newly out:
"Is it A Choice? Answers to 300 Most Asked Questions About Gay and Lesbian People" by Eric Marcus
"Loving Someone Gay" by Don Clark, Ph.D.
"My Child is Gay" by Bryce McDougall, editor
Last updated May 29, 2011

| ||What Your Doctor Is Saying || |
What Are the Odds? Understanding Risk
Last reviewed on September 12, 2012
By Robert H. Shmerling, M.D.
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
"If you take this medication, you will reduce your risk of disease by 20%, and 98% of people taking it have no serious side effects."
Sounds good, right? Perhaps not. What if your chance of getting the disease is only one in 1,000 but two people out of every 100 experience a deadly side effect?
Talk About Risk
Doctors, nurses, reporters and drug advertisers often talk about risk, though they may not call it that. In fact, they often use other terms that sound logical and understandable such as "chance" or "likelihood" (as in "if you smoke, you will increase your chances of having lung disease"). Alternatively, they may couch the terms in personal experience (as in "I think this medicine will help you; it works for most of my patients"). Or, the message may be even more vague: When a doctor says "I think this therapy will help and I doubt it will cause you any problems," the doctor is really saying he or she hopes it helps because it usually does, but that there is a risk that the medication will cause side effects and/or that it will not work.
Whether or not the word is used, these are all examples of risk, the notion that something might or might not happen and that the likelihood is not zero or 100%. I was taught in medical school to "never say never and never say always," because absolute certainty is so rare.
Back to top
Risk Is Not Simple
Risk is a trickier concept than many people think. It may seem like something to avoid at all costs, but the fact is that while you may be able to choose one risk over another, you cannot always avoid risk altogether. Avoiding one risk may pose other risks. For example, if you have high blood pressure and a doctor prescribes a medication to lower it, there is a risk of side effects from the medication; but by avoiding the risk of having a side effect, you increase the risk that you will have a stroke due to untreated high blood pressure.
Many people view any risk at all as a terrible thing, but it is important to realize that it represents a chance that something will happen, not a certainty. Even when talking about bad outcomes (such as the risk of surgery or the risk of medication side effects), there is often an excellent chance that nothing bad will happen.
Consider this example. For a person suffering chronic arthritis and terrible joint pain for the last two years, symptoms probably will continue unless something changes (such as starting an effective treatment). The risk of side effects from any medication is clearly important, but it must be weighed against the high risk that joint pain will continue. If three out of 100 people taking a high-dose anti-inflammatory medication (such as ibuprofen) develop a stomach ulcer each year (that is, if the yearly risk is 3%), it is important to weigh that against the risk of ongoing pain (which is much higher). And it also means that 97 out of 100 people will not suffer an ulcer as they enjoy the benefits of the medication.
Back to top
The Confusing Ways To Describe Risk
The other reason risk is confusing is that there are many ways it can be described. People may choose one way to describe risk to emphasize how high it is, while others use another way to express the same risk to downplay it. Remarkably, the same risk can seem quite different depending on how it is expressed.
One of the most common areas of confusion comes with the difference between absolute risk and relative risk. Imagine that you are offered a choice of two medications to reduce your risk of a heart attack:
- Medication A will decrease your risk of heart attack by 20%.
- Medication B reduces your risk from 5% to 4%.
If you think that Medication A sounds better, you are not alone. Relative risk is described, by comparing the new risk with the risk before treatment. Although vitally important, the actual risk with and without the medicine is not mentioned for Medication A. If you thought Medication B sounds less impressive, perhaps it's because knowing that the starting and ending risks are similar that is, knowing the actual, or absolute, risks makes the change seem less dramatic. This is particularly true when overall risk is very low or very high in the first place. Although they provide a more accurate assessment of risk, expressions of absolute risk are often missing from news or ads.
Most of us would think that Medication A is better. But as described, Medication A and B could be the same drug. Reducing a risk of 5 in 100 to 4 in 100 is identical to a 20% relative risk reduction.
So it is not surprising that what you usually read in news reports and see in advertisements are changes in relative risk rather than the more critical number, the absolute risk. The relative risk tends to be the larger and more persuasive number. For the person or advertiser trying to make a dramatic point, most people find it easier to relate to one number (20% risk reduction for medication A) rather than keeping track of the initial risk and how it changes with treatment (5% to 4% for medication B). However, the simplicity of relative risk comes at the cost of incomplete and potentially misleading information. Without knowing where you started, a relative risk reduction of 20% can be nearly meaningless.
Consider one of the most commonly prescribed medications in the world: the birth control pill. For nonsmoking women aged 25 to 29, the risk of death attributed to side effects of the pill is estimated at about 1 in 100,000 and doubles for women who are 30 to 34. If a 33-year-old woman were told she has twice the risk of dying from a birth control pill than a woman under 30, she might incorrectly interpret this as high risk. In fact, even though her risk is slightly higher than for younger women (by 0.001%), she is actually at a very low risk of dying, even lower than the estimated risk of death related to childbirth (10 to 25 per 100,000, also rising with age).
There are, of course, other ways to express risk that shape how it is perceived. Reports of new cases of prostate cancer diagnosed "every three minutes" or the lifetime risk of breast cancer being one in nine, are not very helpful in understanding your own particular risk. Estimating your individual risk by considering factors known to affect it (for example, smoking, which dramatically increases the risk of lung cancer) is a better way to express risk. The generally quoted figure for the risk of getting struck by lightning is 1 in 600,000, but it's much greater if you are holding a metal rod (for instance, a golf club) on a hill during a thunderstorm.
Risk tends to be better understood when broken down by a finite length of time, such as five or 10 years, rather than over one's entire life. Reports of lifetime risk may also include disease that has no bearing on one's overall health, such as a slow-growing prostate tumor that never affects health or longevity (a common scenario among elderly men).
Back to top
The Bottom Line
It is important to acknowledge that risk is easy to misunderstand even with accurate and unbiased information. Cynics say statistics can be used to argue any position, and there is some truth to that. But there are some simple measures you can take to get a better handle on risk:
- Acknowledge that risk is a fact of life and often cannot be avoided entirely. In fact, most decisions one makes about how to prevent or treat disease depend on balancing the risks and benefits of the treatment options.
- Look for reports that put the risk in context. One way is to compare one risk to another, more familiar risk. For example, the risk of contracting a rare disease could be compared with being struck by lightning, while a more common condition could be compared with the risk of injury or death in a car accident.
- Ask yourself if the source is objective and seeks only to inform you, or whether there is another goal in mind. Sometimes it's easy: If the source is an advertiser trying to sell you something, the information is more likely to be biased.
- Beware of reports that use lifetime risk or ones that convert the number of cases per year to cases per day or hour. Even if they are technically accurate, they are probably overemphasizing the point.
What matters most is the absolute rather than the relative risk. In my initial example of the drug with a 20% relative risk reduction with no serious side effects in 98% of users, two fewer people out of every 10,000 would get the disease, but 200 would experience a deadly side effect clearly an example of a treatment that is worse than the disease. But it's also an example of how misleading descriptions of risk can be.
Back to top
Robert H. Shmerling, M.D. is associate physician at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and associate professor at Harvard Medical School. He has been a practicing rheumatologist for over 20 years at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. He is an active teacher in the Internal Medicine Residency Program, serving as the Robinson Firm Chief. He is also a teacher in the Rheumatology Fellowship Program.

The satellite images displayed are infrared (IR) images. Warmest (lowest) clouds are shown in white; coldest (highest) clouds are displayed in shades of yellow, red, and purple. Imagery is obtained from the GOES and METEOSAT geostationary satellites, and the two US Polar Orbiter (POES) satellites. POES satellites orbit the earth 14 times each day at an altitude of approximately 520 miles (870 km). As each orbit is made the satellite can view a 1,600 mile (2,700 km) wide area of the earth. Due to the rotation of the earth the satellite is able to view every spot on earth twice each day. Data from multiple orbits are mosaicked together to provide wide scale global and full earth views in a single image. Occasional dark triangular areas that occur on POES images are a result of gaps in data transmitted from the orbiters.
A weather satellite
is a type of satellite that is primarily used to monitor the weather
of the Earth. These meteorological satellites, however, see more than clouds
and cloud systems
. City lights, fires, effects of pollution, auroras, sand and dust storms, snow cover
, ice mapping, boundaries of ocean
currents, energy flows, etc., are other types of environmental information collected using weather satellites.
Weather satellite images helped in monitoring the volcanic ash cloud from Mount St. Helens and activity from other volcanoes such as Mount Etna. Smoke from fires in the western United States such as Colorado and Utah have also been monitored.
Other environmental satellites can detect changes in the Earth's vegetation, sea
color, and ice fields. For example, the 2002 oil spill off the northwest coast of Spain was watched carefully by the European ENVISAT, which, though not a weather satellite, flies an instrument (ASAR) which can see changes in the sea surface
El Niño and its effects on weather are monitored daily from satellite images. The Antarctic ozone hole is mapped from weather satellite data. Collectively, weather satellites flown by the U.S., Europe, India, China, Russia, and Japan provide nearly continuous observations
for a global weather

... 1542, Catherine Howard was beheaded for adultery at the Tower of London. Of this queen (below right), the 5th of 6 wives of the English King Henry VIII, this website writes:
Catherine Howard did not have an impact upon English history. She is perhaps the most inconsequential of Henry VIII's six wives, her reign as queen a very brief eighteen months. She bore no children and made no lasting impression upon those who knew her. But it should be remembered that she was thirty years younger than her husband, a silly young girl who never understood the dangers of royal regard. Her life was over before it had truly begun; we can only wonder how it might have ended differently.Not a word of fault found with the fatally fickle king.
... 1961, officials in the province of Katanga announced that the man who'd served from June to September 1960 as Congo's 1st Prime Minister, Patrice Lumumba, was dead. It was claimed that Lumumba (below left) had been "killed by villagers trying to take him into custody"; however, years later that was deemed not to be the whole truth. According to the BBC:
A Belgian Government inquiry into the murders reported in November 2001 that they would not have taken place without the complicity of Belgian and American intelligence services.
In February 2002 the Belgian Government made its first official apology for its part in the assassinations and has set up a $3m fund to encourage democracy and development in the Democratic Republic of Congo.

Kate Wiley (202) 633-3129
Smithsonian’s Lemelson Center Spotlights Hollywood’s History of Innovation
“Places of Invention” Exhibition to Feature Development of Technicolor
The Academy Awards would be much less colorful without the innovations in 1930s and ’40s Hollywood filmmaking that the Smithsonian’s Lemelson Center for the Study of Invention and Innovation will showcase in its upcoming “Places of Invention” exhibition, set to open in 2015.
Initiative and creativity drove Hollywood’s “Golden Age”—a time of great technological change in the motion picture industry, moving from silent and black-and-white to sound and color. “Places of Invention” will highlight the invention and adoption of Technicolor, detailing the three-strip process used in The Wizard of Oz and Gone With the Wind and reveal the people behind its success, inventors Herbert Kalmus, Daniel Comstock and W. Burton Westcott, who set up shop in Hollywood in 1923. Also integral to its success was Natalie Kalmus, a consultant for Technicolor on many classic films who, in making decisions about makeup, costumes and lighting, controlled the aura of Technicolor.
“Our take on the Hollywood story goes behind the camera to examine the inventions that significantly changed both the way movies were made and the complexity and popularity of movies themselves,” said Art Molella, director of the center. “The Hollywood and Technicolor stories exemplify the outcomes possible when creativity and collaboration are allowed to thrive.”
The invention and evolution of Technicolor made possible such awards as Best Visual Effects while transforming Hollywood into a hot spot of innovation—a place where a critical mass of inventive people, networks, institutions and funding come together and creativity flourishes.
This year alone, six of the nine nominees for Best Picture implemented various Technicolor technologies in their films. Overall, 19 films nominated for Oscars employed Technicolor’s various offerings in their respective films.
“Places of Invention”—made possible by a $2.6 million grant from the National Science Foundation—will feature a selection of hot spots of invention and innovation. The planned 3,500-square-foot exhibition will focus on the mid-19th century to the present and will feature hands-on experiences based on inventive skill-building and illustrating the ways that places and social collaboration shape the inventive process. For more on the exhibition, visit http://invention.smithsonian.org/places.
The Smithsonian’s Lemelson Center’s activities advance scholarship on the history of invention, share stories about inventors and their work and nurture creativity in young people. The center embodies a philosophy akin to that of the inventors we study, of valuing creativity and embracing the potential rewards of intellectual risk-taking. The center is supported by The Lemelson Foundation, a private philanthropy established by one of the country’s most prolific inventors, Jerome Lemelson, and his family. The Lemelson Center is located in the National Museum of American History. For more information, visit http://invention.smithsonian.org.
# # #

For the first time since 1415, we are going to have a conclave or papal election with no Pope to bury beforehand. But the procedures for the election are not affected by this ‘novelty.’ Dan Brown might seem an unlikely source for information on a Papal election but the detailed description in Angels and Demons was apparently taken from a book by a Jesuit scholar and is quite accurate.
When the See of Rome is declared vacant – normally when a Pope dies – most of the senior prelates who were the Pope’s ‘ministers’ resign. Power is entrusted to a cardinal called the Camerlengo, in this case Cardinal Tarcisio Bertone, who under normal circumstances would bury the Pope.
The last papal election took 48 hours, but such speed wasn’t always the case. In the 13th century the papacy was vacant for a year-and-a-half and an election was forced by the people of Rome who locked up the cardinals until a pope was elected. In another case, the people not only locked up the cardinals, they tore off the roof of the building and put the cardinals on a diet of bread and water.
Now, with Benedict’s resignation the cardinals are essentially being given a ‘month’s notice’ and can plan their trip to Rome and think about what they want in the new pope. In a sense, because of the pre-planning that can be brought to bear on this election, there is potentially a lot of time to consider who should be the next leader of the world’s 1 billion catholics.
The cardinals will stay in a specially constructed 5 storey residence inside the Vatican walls, Santa Marta. and will be conveyed by coach to the Sistine Chapel for morning and afternoon sessions there. The process of election must begin no more than 20 days after the see is vacant. Only cardinals under the age of 80 can enter the conclave – the word means ‘with a key’ in Latin, referring to the fact that the Cardinals are locked into the election hall.
There are 119 eligible to vote, 67 of whom were appointed by Benedict and the rest by JPII. Cardinals who are excommunicated can actually attend but not those who have resigned. A cardinal who resigned and joined Napolean Bonaparte attempted to enter the conclave in 1800 but was refused.
On the morning of the conclave the cardinals con-celebrate Mass in St Peter’s Basilica. In the afternoon they gather in the Pauline Chapel in the Apostolic Palace and solemnly process in full red and white regalia with red hats and enter the Sistine chapel, with the doors locked behind them. All telephones, cell phones, radios, televisions and internet connections are removed from use whether in the chapel or in the residence. They cannot leave except in the case of grave illness. Also permitted in the conclave are two medical doctors, a nurse for very ill cardinals, and religious priests who can hear confessions in various languages. These have to swear absolute and perpetual secrecy.
The cardinals swear an oath of secrecy not to discuss the elections outside the Chapel and everyone else is ordered out in the Latin words “Extra omnes,” “Everybody out.” The doors of the Sistine Chapel and the Residence of the Cardinals are closed.
Inside, a meditation is given concerning the grave duty of the cardinals and they are exhorted to “only have God before your eyes.” The rest of the time is spent for prayer and voting in silence, there are no campaign speeches. Negotiations and arguments have to take place outside.
In the Chapel, which dates from the 15th Century, and under the ceiling adorned with Michelangelo's Last Judgement, the cardinals can cast their vote. There will be four ballots daily until a clear majority is found for one candidate.
It is severely frowned upon to seek the office of Pope and canvassing for it is severely prohibited, especially prior to a Pope dying. It is an office bestowed upon a person rather than their contesting for it. However an outsider could be elected pope and in theory it could be a lay person willing to be ordained a priest and bishop but the weight of tradition suggests it will be one of the cardinals gathered in the Sistine chapel. The last non cardinal was Pope Urban in 1378.
However, discussions prior to a ballot among cardinals do occur privately but public campaigning would be counter productive. Dinners are good vehicles for discussions. However, the best known cardinals tend to be the ones that work in the Vatican and meet other bishops, and cardinals when they come on business to Rome.
The ballot is secret and Pope John Paul II abolished two methods of election: by compromise or by common consent. Since 1179, a new Pope requires a two thirds majority. Now, after 33 ballots, a simple majority is enough. If there is no progress in choosing a candidate, a day of prayer is set aside. However, not since 1831 has an election lasted more than four days.
The ballot papers themselves are rectangular with “I elect as supreme pontiff” printed at the top and each cardinal prints or writes a name in a way that disguises his handwriting. One at a time they approach the altar with the folded ballot held up, he kneels and prays and then places the ballot in a silver and gilded bronze urn, much like a wok with a lid. Cardinals called ‘scrutineers’ count the ballots. After the ballots are read aloud they are placed on a thread and placed in another urn. They are then burnt.
Since 1903, white smoke from the chimney of the Sistine Chapel has signalled the election of a pope; black smoke signals another vote.
When a pope is finally elected, the cardinal dean asks him, “Do you accept your canonical election as supreme pontiff?” Rarely does anyone say no. St Philip Benize was offered it in 1271 and fled and hid until another candidate was chosen.
Sacristy of Tears
After the ‘yes’, he is led into the ‘Sacristy of Tears’ or commonly called ‘Room of Tears,’ a small room off the Sistine Chapel. It is here that the enormity of what has just happened hits the new Pope, though the tears may be of sorrow or joy. Traditionally they were said to be tears of humility as a Pope was following in the footsteps of St Peter; others would contend the tears were because essentially the Pope becomes a ‘prisoner’ of the Vatican and would be bowed down by the weight of the office.
The new Pope picks one of three sizes of Papal garments – presumably small, medium or large – and return to the High Altar to receive the homage of the cardinals. Meanwhile, the ballots are burnt in a stove with a chemical which turns the smoke white, telling the world of the newly elected Pontiff.
A Cardinal is then sent to the Loggia of the Benedictions on the façade of St Peter’s where he says: “Annuntio vobis gaudium magnum. I announce to you a great joy! Habemus Papam. We have a Pope!” He then announces the name of the cardinal and the name he has chosen to use as Pope.
The new Pope steps onto the balcony and therefore onto the stage of world and church history. He may grant his first blessing to the world.
Some days later, the new Pope will go down into the foundations of St Peter’s to the tomb of Peter, the first Pope and first bishop of Rome, and pray. Then with all the cardinals, he will process into St Peter’s Square to begin his first public Mass and receive the main symbols of his office: the fisherman’s ring and the pallium.

|Scientific Name:||Phoebastria albatrus|
|Species Authority:||(Pallas, 1769)|
|Red List Category & Criteria:||Vulnerable D2 ver 3.1|
|Reviewer/s:||Butchart, S. & Taylor, J.|
|Contributor/s:||Balogh, G., Chan, S., Hasegawa, H., Peet, N., Rivera, K. & Suryan, R.|
This species is listed as Vulnerable because, although conservation efforts have resulted in a steady population increase, it still has a very small breeding range, limited to Torishima and Minami-kojima (Senkaku Islands), rendering it susceptible to stochastic events and human impacts.
Phoebastria albatrus breeds on Torishima (Japan), and Minami-kojima (Senkaku Islands), that are claimed jointly by Japan, mainland China and Chinese Taipei. Historically there are believed to have been at least nine colonies south of Japan and in the East China Sea (Piatt et al. 2006). Its marine range covers most of the northern Pacific Ocean, but it occurs in highest densities in areas of upwelling along shelf waters of the Pacific Rim, particularly along the coasts of Japan, eastern Russia, the Aleutians and Alaska (Piatt et al. 2006, Suryan et al. 2007). During breeding (December - May) it is found in highest densities around Japan. Satellite tracking has indicated that during the post-breeding period, females spend more time offshore of Japan and Russia, while males and juveniles spend greater time around the Aleutian Islands, Bering Sea and off the coast of North America (Suryan et al. 2007). Juveniles have been shown to travel twice the distances per day and spend more time within continental shelf habitat than adult birds (Suryan et al. 2008). The species declined dramatically during the 19th and 20th centuries owing to exploitation for feathers, and was believed extinct in 1949, but was rediscovered in 1951. The current population is estimated, via direct counts and modelling based on productivity data, to be 2,364 individuals, with 1,922 birds on Torishima and 442 birds on Minami-kojima (G.R. Balogh in litt. 2008). In 1954, 25 birds (including at least six pairs) were present on Torishima. Given that there are now c.426 breeding pairs on Torishima (G.R. Balogh in litt. 2008), the species has undergone an enormous increase since its rediscovery and the onset of conservation efforts. In addition, in 2010, one nesting pair was observed on Kure Atoll (Hawaii, USA), but was probably female-female and unsuccessful, and one chick was produced on Midway Atoll (M. Naughton pers. comm. 2011). A tsunami which hit Midway Atoll in March 2011, did not impact on the single pair nesting on Eastern Island (U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service 2008).
Native:Canada; China; Japan; Korea, Republic of; Mexico; Russian Federation; Taiwan, Province of China; United States; United States Minor Outlying Islands
Present - origin uncertain:Northern Mariana Islands; Philippines
|Range Map:||Click here to open the map viewer and explore range.|
|Population:||At the end of the 2006-2007 breeding season, the global population was estimated to be 2,364 individuals, with 1,922 birds on Torishima and 442 birds on Minami-kojima (Senkaku Islands). This estimate is based on: direct observation of breeding pairs on Torishima; an assumption on numbers of non-breeding birds; an estimate for the Minami-kojima population that is based upon a 2002 estimate and an assumption of population growth rate (which, together, puts the Minami-kojima population at about 15% of the global population [G.R. Balogh in litt. 2008]). More recently, Brazil (2009) estimates the population in Japan at c.100-10,000 breeding pairs and c.50-1,000 individuals on migration. The population is taken here as likely to number 2,200-2,500 individuals based on these estimates, roughly equating to 1,500-1,700 mature individuals.|
|Habitat and Ecology:||Behaviour Phoebastria albatrus is a colonial, annually breeding species, with each breeding cycle lasting about 8 months. Birds begin to arrive at the main colony on Torishima Island in early October. A single egg is laid in late October to late November and incubation lasts 64 to 65 days. Hatching occurs in late December through January. Chicks begin to fledge in late May into June. There is little information on timing of breeding on Minami-kojima. First breeding sometimes occurs when birds are five years old, but more commonly when birds are aged six. It forages diurnally and potentially nocturnally, either singly or in groups primarily taking prey by surface-seizing (ACAP 2009). During the breeding season, individuals nesting off Japan forage over the continental shelf (Kiyota and Minami 2008). Habitat Breeding Historically, it preferred level, open, areas adjacent to tall clumps of the grass Miscanthus sinensis for nesting. Diet It feeds mainly on squid, but also takes shrimp, fish, flying fish eggs and other crustaceans (ACAP 2009). It has been recorded following ships to feed on scraps and fish offal.|
|Major Threat(s):||Its historical decline was caused by exploitation. Today, the key threats are the instability of soil on its main breeding site (Torishima), the threat of mortality and habitat loss from the active volcano on Torishima, and mortality caused by fisheries. Torishima is also vulnerable to other natural disasters, such as typhoons. Introduced predators are a potential threat at colonies. Environmental contaminants at sea (oil based compounds) may also be a threat (G.R. Balogh in litt. 2008). Threats at sea (fisheries, oil pollution) are exacerbated by the fact that birds concentrate into predictable hotspots (Piatt et al. 2006). Modelling work has showed that even a small increase in low level chronic mortality (such as fisheries bycatch) has more of an impact on population growth rates than stochastic and theoretically catastrophic events, such as volcanic eruptions (Finkelstein et al. 2010). Phoebastria albatrus has the greatest potential overlap with fisheries that occur in the shallower waters along continental shelf break and slope regions, e.g., sablefish and Pacific halibut longline fisheries off the coasts of Alaska and British Columbia. Although, overlap between the distribution of birds and fishery effort does not mean that interactions between birds and boats necessarily occur, P. albatrus are known to have been killed in U.S. and Russian longline fisheries for Pacific cod and Pacific halibut. In addition, birds on Torishima have been observed with hooks in their mouths of the style used in Japanese fisheries near the island (ACAP 2009).|
Conservation Actions Underway
It is legally protected in Japan, Canada and the USA. A draft recovery plan has been developed (USFWS 2005). Mitigation measures have been established in the Alaska demersal longline fishery and in the Hawaii-based pelagic longline fishery (NOAA 2008). Streamer lines (both heavy weight lines for large boats and lightweight lines for smaller vessels) have been designed to keep birds from longline hooks as they are set, and these are being distributed free to the Alaskan longline fleet (USFWS 2005), though they are not deployed in near-shore waters. In 2006, the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission passed a measure which requires large tuna and swordfish longline vessels (>24m long) to use a combination of two seabird bycatch mitigation measures when fishing north of 23 degrees North. Torishima has been established as a National Wildlife Protection Area. In 1981-1982, native plants were transplanted into the Torishima nesting colony in order to stabilise the nesting habitat and the nest structures. This has enhanced breeding success, with over 60% of eggs now resulting in fledged young. Decoys have been used to attract birds to nest at another site on Torishima since 1993 and the first pair started breeding at this new site in November 1995. The number of chicks fledged from this new colony has increased from one chick in 2004; four chicks in 2005; 13 chicks in 2006; 16 chicks in 2007. In October-November 2007, 35 eggs were laid at this new site (Sato 2009). In 2007, the Japanese government approved a project to translocate chicks from Torishima to Mukojima, 300 km away. All ten chicks of the first translocations in March 2008 fledged (Jacobs 2009). If successful, this project will translocate at least ten chicks per year for five years. Conservation Actions Proposed
Continue to promote measures designed to protect this species from becoming hooked or entangled by commercial fishing gear. Re-establish birds within historic range as insurance against natural disasters on primary breeding colony. Promote conservation measures for the Minami-kojima population. Continue research into the at-sea distribution and marine habitat use through satellite telemetry studies. Continue land-based management and population monitoring.
|Citation:||BirdLife International 2012. Phoebastria albatrus. In: IUCN 2012. IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2012.2. <www.iucnredlist.org>. Downloaded on 18 May 2013.|
|Feedback:||If you see any errors or have any questions or suggestions on what is shown on this page, please fill in the feedback form so that we can correct or extend the information provided|

Ahh, the pincer grasp! It's an important evolutionary milestone that nobody knows about until they become parents. (Why should opposable thumbs get all the attention?) The ability to pick up small objects using your thumb and pointer finger usually kicks in around 9 months -- and, the bonus for parents is that it allows infants to feed their own darn selves. So put down the spoon and serve up these great finger food ideas.
Don't Expect Your Baby to Chew
"Before age one, babies gum their food rather than chew it," says Jennifer Shu, M.D., coauthor of the book Food Fights from the American Academy of Pediatrics. So serve up tiny bites -- about the size of a pea or your pinky fingernail -- in case your tot swallows it whole. Common choking hazard to avoid: Hot dogs and other sausages, hard or gummy candy, chewing gum, all nuts, whole grapes and cherry tomatoes, raisins and any dried-fruit pieces, popcorn, and seeds and gobs of peanut (or other nut) butter. But any food can pose a choking risk if not sized right. Quarter grapes, slice blueberries, dice cooked carrots, break up crackers, and so on.

The First Liberation Day in the DP Camps
Livik's opinion was clear: There was no reason to celebrate or to put on a festive face, since "joy has been silenced in the Jewish heart, our words are still full of sorrow"... Shmuel Grinberg, in contrast, agreed that She'arit Hapleta would soon be marking Liberation Day... but warned against losing the historical perspective of what was happening. Even though anti-Semitism had not disappeared and Jewish suffering had not ended, "we neither have nor want to weaken the great historic truth, the great struggle against the monster of human oppression, for our spiritual and moral liberation". Leo Schwarz, who took part in the meeting, explained: "One of the main questions was, should the liberation be commemorated today as a day of mourning or a day of thanksgiving. There was little disagreement about the memory of the murdered martyrs... concerning celebrations of Liberation Day there were differences among groups within She'arit Hapleta, but the victors were those whose psychology had already been influenced by the positive dialectic of the future. Most members of the Central Committee supported the declaration of "a memorial day combined with the liberation, which must express our grief and bitterness over the great tragedy of European Jewry, and simultaneously be a day of thanksgiving, which will be celebrated as a national symbol and will emphasize that the Jewish people still lives". It was decided to observe the 14th of Adar as Liberation Day (15th May in 1946), as a memorial and victory day.
From: Mankovitz, Ze'ev, Ideology and Politics Among She'arit Hapleta in the American Zone of Occupation in Germany 1945-1946, Ph.D. thesis, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 1987, pp. 279-280 (Hebrew).
Source: Yad Vashem

DEPUTIES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE
DEPUTIES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE, representatives of Jewish communities in Russia to the government during the reign of *Alexander I (1801–25). After parts of *Poland-Lithuania had been annexed by Russia, the large communities sent shtadlanim to the court at St. Petersburg to represent them and defend their rights. Most of the shtadlanim were merchants or contractors who visited the city on business. When a committee was set up to frame a "Jewish constitution" in 1802–04 it was joined by several government-appointed Jewish advisers (N.N. *Notkin, A. *Peretz, and J.L. *Nevakhovich). The government also requested some important communities to send representatives to the committee. Together they tried to influence the committee in favor of Jewish rights. In 1807 the government appointed a "Jewish committee" to implement the inimical "Jewish constitution" of 1804 and proposed that the communities elect deputies to represent the Jews before the provincial governors. The memoranda of these deputies were referred to the "Jewish committee" in St. Petersburg and were influential in obtaining a temporary halt to the expulsion of Jews from the villages. It was also proposed to abolish the prohibition on the lease and sale of alcohol by Jews. During the invasion by Napoleon two "deputies of the Jewish people," Zundel Sonnenberg and Eliezer Dillon, accompanied Alexander's military headquarters in 1812–13, and acted as liaison between the czar and the large Jewish population in the combat area. They regularly presented memoranda and petitions concerning Jewish affairs to the court and transmitted its instructions to the Jewish communities. After the war an attempt was made to convert the committee of deputies into a permanent institution. The Jewish communities were requested to send representatives to St. Petersburg to maintain permanent contact with the ministries of religious affairs and popular education. On August 19, 1818, electors from the 12 districts (gubernia) of the *Pale of Settlement convened and elected three deputies, Zundel Sonnenberg, Beinush Lapkovski, and Michael Eisenstadt, and three deputy representatives. In order to raise funds to cover their expenses, which probably also included furnishing bribes, the assembly resolved that every Jew was to donate the silver headpiece of his prayer shawl. The change in Alexander's policy toward the Jews at the end of his reign reduced the importance and status of the deputies. Sonnenberg was dismissed because of "impudence toward the authorities." In 1825 the Jewish deputation was officially suspended "until the need arises for a new deputation," and the institution was thereby abolished and not renewed. However, the government continued to make use of Jewish representatives. In 1840 consultative committees, chosen from among "enlightened" Jews, were created and attached to governors in Kiev and five other towns. In 1844 the function of "Learned Jew" (uchoni yevrei) was created, meaning an expertand consultant in Jewish religious affairs attached to the district governers and responsible for education and interior affairs.
J.I. Hessen (Gessen), Yevrei v Rossii (1906), 421–32; idem, in: Yevreyskaya starina, 2 (1909), 17–29, 196–206; S. Pen, in: Voskhod, nos. 1–3 (1905).
[Yehuda Slutsky /
Shmuel Spector (2nd ed.)]
Source: Encyclopaedia Judaica. © 2008 The Gale Group. All Rights Reserved.

Judaic Treasures of the
Jerusalem was and remains the holiest of cities in the Holy Land, but Jews also gave a measure of holiness to three other cities there: Hebron, Safed, and Tiberias. The holiness of Jerusalem arises in part from what remains there, but more from what took place there. So it is with its sister cities. Hebron is where the patriarchs and matriarchs lived and are buried, and it was the first capital of King David. Tiberias, on the shore of the Sea of Galilee, was chosen by the patriarch of the Jews in the second century as his seat. The Palestinian Talmud was largely composed in its great rabbinical academy. in the environs of Safed, high in the Galilean hills, are the graves of the leading rabbis of late antiquity. Its stature as a holy city was enhanced in the sixteenth century, when it was the greatest center of Jewish mysticism and seat of Jewish legal scholarship. To gain entree into the company of the three more ancient holy cities, it called itself Beth-El, suggesting identity with the biblical site which Jacob called "The Gate of Heaven."
A striking pastel-colored manuscript "holy site map" links these four holy cities together. Drawn and painted in Palestine in the second half of the nineteenth century, it depicts those venues which indicate their holiness. There is a suggestion of their geographic positioning, but the "map" is far more a statement of the place these cities hold in Jewish veneration, than of the geographical site they occupy. To pious Jewish families, such wall plaques were more meaningful depictions of the Holy Land than the most aesthetically beautiful and topographically exact representations.
A small illustrated guide book to the burial places of biblical figures and saintly rabbis in the Holy Land, Zikaron Birushalayim, appeared in Constantinople in 1743. It tells the pious pilgrim where graves may be found and what prayers are to be said. Prefaced by a panegyric to the land, it cites a midrashic statement that, in time to come, when Jerusalem shall be rebuilt, three walls-one of silver, one of gold, and the innermost of multicolored precious stones-will encompass the dazzling city.
In Hebron the pilgrim is not only directed to the holy grave sites, but also regaled with wondrous tales. One tells of a sexton of the community sent down to search for a ring which had fallen to the depths of the patriarchs' burial cave, finding at the floor of the cave three ancient men seated on chairs, engaged in study. He greets them; they return his greetings, give him the ring, and instruct him not to disclose what he had learned. When he ascended and was asked what he had seen, he replied: "Three elders sitting on chairs. As for the rest, I am not permitted to tell."
For actual pilgrims, the little volume provided factual information. For pilgrims in their own imagination, it offered edification through tales and quaint illustrations. The last page has a woodcut of Jericho, a seven-walled city, below which a man surrounded by a multitude is sounding a shofar. The most striking woodcut is of an imposing building, representing the Temple in Jerusalem.
In the concentric circles of holiness cited in the Tanhuma, Jerusalem is at the center of the Holy Land; the Temple at the center of Jerusalem; and the Holy of Holies at the center of the Holy Temple. The Temple is prominently featured in illustrated books about the Holy Land. In A Pisgah-Sight of Palestine, three chapters describe and three engravings portray the Temple. Early Hebrew books are quite poor in illustrations, because relatively few deal with subjects that demand visual presentation.
Among these are books dealing with laws concerning the Temple, and since its architecture and vessels are pertinent to the laws, they invite illustration. A case in point is Sefer Hanukat Ha-Bayit by Moses (Hefez) Gentili (1663-1711), published in Venice in 1696. A treatise on the building of the Second Temple, it abounds in engraved architectural illustrations, including a menorah, the seven-branched candlestick; most notable is a large pull-out map of the Temple, identifying fifty-eight components of the Temple's structure. The engravings were added after the printing, as was the map, and a copy containing both is rare.
Moses Gentili, born in Trieste, lived in Venice where he taught Talmud and Midrash, and perhaps philosophy and science as well. His best-known work, Melekhet Mahashevet, Venice, 1710, a commentary on the Pentateuch, contains a picture of the author, a clean-shaven, ministerial-looking gentleman.
There are many published descriptions and illustrations of the Temple's appearance in many languages. Some are based on careful study of the available sources, others are creations of the imagination, generally inspired by the grandest building the artist knew. A plan of the Temple to be is found at the end of the 1789 Grodno edition of Zurat Beit Ha-Mikdash (The Form of the Holy Temple) by Yom Tov Lipmann Heller (1579-1654), one of the major figures in Jewish scholarship in the first half of the seventeenth century. The book is one of Heller's earliest works and is a projection of the plan of the Temple as envisaged in the prophecy of Ezekiel.
We have thus traversed the Holy Land and glimpsed its holy places, past, present, and future.

To make this sentence true i have to put <,>,or = in between ( ) the given fractions or Decimals? 7/20 ( ) 2/5 0.15 ( ) 1/8 Please explain?
Given a rectangular prism with dimensions w = 3, l = 4, and h = 6. If you created a second rectangular prism with the length doubled but the height halved (and the width stays the same), which would be the relation of the second volume to the first volume?
740 mm Hg
How would you calculate the concentration of an aqueous solution of Ca(OH2)that has a pH of 12.57.
poetry, part 1
Which one of the following lines best illustrates personification? A. A narrow wind complains all day. B. The fog comes on little cat feet. C. She floated graceful as a dove. D. Spring is a dream unsung.
Wilma's arm is broken when Paula knocks her down during an agrument. If Wilma sues Paula for battery, what damages is Wilma likely to receive?
Well I saying both. I have describe two cultrals and their views on health. i shows african and caucaisians american. I know that african american An excessive impact on minority populations is chronic diseases. Chronic diseases that are consider in African American are AIDS, ...
I need some help with what are some of the implications to health care providers in African American and Caucasian? Considering cultural views on the health as organic, health as harmony and disease as a curse or stigma
I need some help with listing at two pros and cons for each of the given patient and caregiver roles as a -Mechanics and machines -Parents and children -Spiritualists and believers -Providers and consumers -Partners This is so I can right my paper
For Further Reading

Acrylic A synthetic fabric often used as a wool substitute. It is warm, soft, holds colors well and often is stain and wrinkle resistant.
Angora Rabbit Hair A soft fiber knit from fur of the Angora rabbit. Angora wool is often combined with cashmere or another fiber to strengthen the delicate structure. Dry cleaning is recommended for Angora products.
Bedford A strong material that is a raised corded fabric (similar to corduroy). Bedford fabric wears well and is usually washable.
Boot Footwear which covers the entire foot and extends to the height of the anklebone or up to the thigh.
Bootie A shoe that resembles a boot in style but is not as high.
Brocade An all-over floral, raised pattern produced in a similar fashion to embroidery.
Cable Knit Patterns, typically used in sweaters, where flat knit columns otherwise known as cables are overlapped vertically.
Cashmere A soft, strong and silky, lightweight wool spun from the Kashmir goat. Cashmere is commonly used in sweaters, shawls, outerwear, gloves and scarves for its warmth and soft feel.
Chiffon A common evening wear fabric made from silk, cotton, rayon or nylon. It's delicate in nature and sheer.
Chintz A printed and glazed fabric made of cotton. Chintz is known for its bright colors and bold patterns.
Circumference The measurement around the shaft of a boot taken at the widest part.
Corduroy Cotton blend fibers twisted as they are woven to create long, parallel grooves, called wales, in the fabric. This is a very durable material and depending on the width of the wales, can be extremely soft.
Cotton A natural fiber that grows in the seed pod of the cotton plant. It is an inelastic fiber.
Crepe Used as a description of surfaces of fabrics. Usually designates a fabric that is crimped or crinkled.
Crinoline A lightweight, plain weave, stiffened fabric with a low yarn count. Used to create volume beneath evening or wedding dresses.
Crochet Looping threads with a hooked needle that creates a wide, open lace. Typically used on sweaters for warm seasons.
Cushioning Padding on the sole of a shoe for added comfort and stabilization.
DenimCotton blend fabric created with a twill weave to create a sturdy fabric. Used as the primary material of blue jeans.
DobbyWoven fabric where the weave of the fabric actually produces the garment's design.
Embroidery Detailed needlework, usually raised and created by yarn, thread or embroidery floss.
Embossed Leather Leather imprinted with a design or exotic skin texture, such as snake, ostrich or croco.
Eyelet A form of lace in a thicker material that consists of cut-outs that are integrated and repeated into a pattern. Usually applied to garments for warmer seasons.
Faille A slightly ribbed, woven fabric of silk, cotton, or rayon.
French Terry A knit cloth that contains loops and piles of yarn. The material is very soft, absorbent and has stretch.
Georgette A crinkly crepe type material usually made out of silk that consists of tightly twisted threads. Georgette is sheer and flowing nature.
Gingham It is a fabric made from dyed cotton year. It is most often know to be woven in a blue and white check or plaid pattern. It is made from corded, medium to fine yarns, with the color running in the warp yarns. There is no right or wrong side of this fabric.
Glen PlaidA woolen fabric, with a woven twill design of large and small checks. A form of traditional plaid originating in Scotland.
Heel Height It is the measurement of a vertical line from the point where the sole meets the heel down to the floor. Heel height is measured in increments of 1/8 of an inch.
Herringbone A pattern originating from masonry, consists of short rows of slanted parallel lines. The rows are formatted opposing each other to create the pattern. Herringbone patterns are used in tweeds and twills.
Hopsack A material created from cotton or wool that is loosely woven together to form a coarse fabric.
Houndstooth A classic design containing two colors in jagged/slanted checks. Similar to Glen Plaid.
Insole The inside lining of the shoe that is underneath the bottom of the foot. Another term for footbed.
Instep The arched section of the foot between the toes and the ankle, or the part of the shoe which covers that area.
Jacquard A fabric of intricate variegated weave or pattern. Typically shown on elegant and more expensive pieces.
Jersey A type of knit material known to be flexible, stretchy, soft and very warm. It is created using tight stitches.
Knit A knit fabric is made by interlocking loops of one or more yarns either by hand with knitting needles or by machine.
LinenAn exquisite material created from the fibers of the flax plant. Some linen contain slubs or small knots on the fabric. The material is a light fabric perfect for warm weather.
LiningThe leather, fabric or synthetic material used on the inside of a shoe.
Lamé A metallic or plastic fiber woven into material to give the garment shine.
Lycra ®TMSpandex fibers add stretch to fabric when the fibers are woven with other fiber blends. These materials are lightweight, comfortableTM and breathable, and the stretch will not wear away.
Madras Originating from Madras, India, this fabric is a lightweight, cotton material used for summer clothing. Madras usually has a checked pattern but also comes in plaid or with stripes. Typically made from 100% cotton.
Marled Typically found in sweaters, marled yarn occurs when two colored yards are twisted together.
Matte A matte finish has a lusterless surface.
Merino Wool Wool sheered from the merino sheep and spun into yarn that is fine but strong.
Modal A type of rayon that is made from natural fibers but goes through a chemical treatment to ensure it has a high threshold of breakage. Modal is soft and breathable which is why it's used as a cotton replacement.
Non-iron A treated cotton that allows our Easy Care Shirts to stay crisp throughout the day and does not need ironing after washing/drying.
Nylon A synthetic fiber that is versatile, fast drying and strong. It has a high resistance to damage.
Ombre A color technique that shades a color from light to dark.
Paisley A pattern that consists of crooked teardrop designs in a repetitive manner.
Patent Leather Leather made from cattle hide that has been varnished to give a hard and glossy finish.
Placket The piece of fabric or cloth that is used as a concealing flap to cover buttons, fasteners or attachments. Most commonly seen in the front of button-down shirts. Also used to reinforce openings or slits in garments.
Piping Binding a seam with decoration. Piping is similar to tipping or edging where a decorative material is sewn into the seams.
Pointelle An open-work knitting pattern used on garments to add texture. Typically a cooler and general knit sweater.
Polyester A fabric made from synthetic fibers. Polyester is quick drying, easy to wash and holds its shape well.
Ponte A knit fabric where the fibers are looped in an interlock. The material is very strong and firm.
Poplin A strong woven fabric, heavier in weight, with ribbing.
Pump Classically a high, medium, or low heeled, totally enclosed shoe. Variations include an open toe or ornament.
Rayon A manufactured fiber developed originally as an alternative for silk. Rayon drapes well and looks luxurious.
Sateen A fabric woven with sheen that resembles satin.
Seersucker Slack-tension weave where yarn is bunched together in certain areas and then pulled taught in others to create this summery mainstay.
Shaft Height Measurement of the shaft of the boot, which is from the top of the boot to the inside seam where the instep and the sole meet.
Shirring Similar to ruching, shirring gathers material to create folds.
Silk One of the most luxurious fibers, silk is soft, warm and has shine. It is obtained from the cocoons of the silkworm's larvae.
Sole The outsole, or bottom part of a shoe.
Space dyed Technique of yarn dyeing to produce a multi-color effect on the yarn itself. Also known as dip dyed yarn.
SpandexElastomeric fiber, this material is able to expand 600% and still snap back to its original shape and form. Spandex fibers are woven with cotton and other fibers to make fabrics stretch.
Stacked Heel A heel made of leather or leawood covering that gives the appearance of wood.
Synthetic Materials Man-made materials designed to look or function like leather.
Tipping Similar to edging, tipping includes embellishing a garment at the edges of the piece, hems, collars etc.
Tissue Linen A type of linen, which is specifically made for blouses or shirts due to its thinness and sheerness.
Tweed A loose weave of heavy wool makes up tweed, which provides warmth and comfort.
Twill A fabric woven in a diagonal weave. Commonly used for chinos and denim.
Variegated Multi-colored fabrics where colors are splotched or in patches.
Velour A stretchy knit fabric, typically made from cotton or polyester. It has a similar soft hand to velvet.
VelvetA pile fabric in which the cut threads are very evenly distributed, with a short dense pile, giving it a distinct feel.
Velveteen A more modern adaptation of velvet, velveteen is made from cotton and has a little give. Also known as imitation velvet.
ViscoseA cellulosic man-made fibers, viscose is soft and supple but can wrinkle easily.
Wale Only found in woven fabrics like corduroy, wale is the long grooves that give the garment its texture.
Wedge Heel A heel that lies flat to the ground and extends from the shank to the back of the shoe.
Windowpane Dark stripes run horizontal and vertical across a light background to mimic a window pane.
Woven A woven fabric is formed by interlacing threads, yarns, strands, or strips of some material.

Bootie A shoe that resembles a boot in style but is not as high.
Brocade An all-over floral, raised pattern produced in a similar fashion to embroidery.
Circumference The measurement around the shaft of a boot taken at the widest part.
Cotton A natural fiber that grows in the seed pod of the cotton plant. It is an inelastic fiber.
Cushioning Padding on the sole of a shoe for added comfort and stabilization.
DobbyWoven fabric where the weave of the fabric actually produces the garment's design.
Embroidery Detailed needlework, usually raised and created by yarn, thread or embroidery floss.
Faille A slightly ribbed, woven fabric of silk, cotton, or rayon.
Houndstooth A classic design containing two colors in jagged/slanted checks. Similar to Glen Plaid.
LiningThe leather, fabric or synthetic material used on the inside of a shoe.
Lamé A metallic or plastic fiber woven into material to give the garment shine.
Marled Typically found in sweaters, marled yarn occurs when two colored yards are twisted together.
Matte A matte finish has a lusterless surface.
Merino Wool Wool sheered from the merino sheep and spun into yarn that is fine but strong.
Ombre A color technique that shades a color from light to dark.
Paisley A pattern that consists of crooked teardrop designs in a repetitive manner.
Poplin A strong woven fabric, heavier in weight, with ribbing.
Sateen A fabric woven with sheen that resembles satin.
Shirring Similar to ruching, shirring gathers material to create folds.
Sole The outsole, or bottom part of a shoe.
Stacked Heel A heel made of leather or leawood covering that gives the appearance of wood.
Synthetic Materials Man-made materials designed to look or function like leather.
Tweed A loose weave of heavy wool makes up tweed, which provides warmth and comfort.
Twill A fabric woven in a diagonal weave. Commonly used for chinos and denim.
Variegated Multi-colored fabrics where colors are splotched or in patches.
ViscoseA cellulosic man-made fibers, viscose is soft and supple but can wrinkle easily.
Wedge Heel A heel that lies flat to the ground and extends from the shank to the back of the shoe.
Woven A woven fabric is formed by interlacing threads, yarns, strands, or strips of some material.

Unnatural Selection: Choosing Boys Over Girls, and the Consequences of a World Full of Men
by Mara Hvistendahl
One of history's more curious encounters occurred in early March 1766 at a country estate in southern England, near Dorking. The estate belonged to Daniel Malthus, a gentleman of independent means and wide intellectual interests. The philosophers David Hume and Jean-Jacques Rousseau were traveling in the neighborhood, seeking a house for Rousseau, who had just recently arrived in England under Hume's patronage after having been driven out of Switzerland.
Daniel Malthus was known to both philosophers, at least by correspondence, so they paid him a brief visit, in the course of which they saw his son Thomas, then just three weeks old. So there, presumably in the same room, were Hume, Rousseau, and the infant Thomas Malthus. It was an odd grouping: the serene empiricist, the neurotic social optimist, and the future oracle of demographic doom.
Hume had actually dabbled in demography himself some years earlier. He had been one of the first to argue against the belief, common until his time, that the ancient world was more populous than the modern world. Demography, along with its cousin discipline of economics, was "in the air" during the later eighteenth century, waiting for the grown-up Malthus to cast his cold eye upon it in his momentous Essay on the Principle of Population (1798).
Of these two cousin disciplines, it is a nice point for argument which better deserves to be called "the dismal science." I would vote for demography. It must be hard to maintain a cheerful composure while scrutinizing the ceaseless, often inexplicable ebbs and flows of nativity and mortality.
It is a strange thing, too — and a depressing one for anyone of an empirical temperament — that what ought to be the most exact of all the human sciences has such a sorry record of prediction. What, after all, could be more certain than that a nation with number N of five-year-olds today will have N fifteen-year-olds in a decade's time, give or take some small margin for attrition and migration? The human sciences don't come any more precise than that. Yet large-scale predictions by demographers have been confounded again and again, from those of Malthus himself to that of Paul Ehrlich, who told us in his 1968 bestseller The Population Bomb that "The battle to feed humanity is over … Billions will die in the 1980s."
Ehrlich's book was very much of its time. The third quarter of the twentieth century was dogged by fears of a Malthusian catastrophe. Popular fiction echoed those fears in productions like John Brunner's novel Stand on Zanzibar (1968) and Richard Fleischer's movie Soylent Green (1973). It was assumed, reasonably enough, that populous poor countries were most at risk, being closest to the limits of food supply. Governments and international organizations therefore got to work promoting birth control in what we had just recently learned to call the Third World, with programs that were often brutally coercive.
Birth rates soon fell; though how much of the drop was directly due to the programs, and how much was an inevitable consequence of modernization, is disputed. The evidence is strong that women liberated from pre-modern subordination to their husbands, and given easy access to contraception, will limit their pregnancies with or without official encouragement.
There was, though, a distressing side effect of the dropping birthrates. Many countries have a strong traditional preference for male children. So long as women in those countries were resigned to a lifetime of child-bearing, the sheer number of offspring ensured that the sex ratio at birth (SRB) would be close to its natural level of 105 males to 100 females. The post-natal ratio might be skewed somewhat by local traditions of female infanticide and by the loss of young men in war, but a rough balance was kept. China in the 1930s had around 108 males per 100 females.
Once the idea of limiting births settled in, however, people sought assurance that one of their babies be male. If a mother gives birth twice, there is a 24 percent chance neither baby will be male; the chance of no males in three births is twelve percent; the chance of no males in four births, six percent. Female infanticide continued to be an option, but not an attractive one — nor, in most modern jurisdictions, a legal one.
Technology met the need by providing methods to determine the sex of a fetus. From the mid-1970s to the early 1980s, amniocentesis was used for this purpose. Then high-quality second trimester ultrasound became widely available and took over the business of fetal sex determination. It caught on very fast all over East and South Asia, allowing women to abort female fetuses. The consequences showed up in last year's Chinese census, whose results are just now being published. They show an SRB of 118 males per 100 females.
These unbalanced sex ratios and their social and demographic consequences form the subject matter of Mara Hvistendahl's book Unnatural Selection. An experienced journalist who has lived for many years in China, Ms. Hvistendahl covers the history, sociology, and science of sex-selective population control very comprehensively. She has organized each of her book's fifteen chapters around the experience of some significant individual: "The Bachelor," "The Parent," "The Economist," and so on.
Her book's scope is by no means restricted to China: "The Student" of Chapter 6 is an Indian who commenced his medical training at a big hospital in Delhi in 1978, when sex-selective abortion was just taking off in India. We get a side trip to Albania, whose SRB is treated as a state secret, but seems to be at least 110. We also learn that sex-selective abortion is common among couples of Chinese, Korean, and Indian descent in the U.S.A. The subjects here are not just newly arrived immigrants, either. A research team from Columbia University found that:
If anything, mothers who were U.S. citizens were slightly more likely to have sons. Sex selection, in other words, is not a tradition from the old country that easily dies out.
South Korea makes a particularly interesting study. That country's governments were more foresighted than most in spotting the problems that might arise from sex-selective abortion. They outlawed the procedure in 1987, and followed up with rigorous enforcement. South Korea's SRB is now at the natural level.
There is more here than meets the eye, though, as Ms. Hvistendahl uncovers. As elsewhere, sex selection was mainly resorted to for second or subsequent births. The SRB for first births is essentially normal worldwide. And first births is wellnigh all the births there are now in South Korea. Our author tells us that: "In 2005 Korea bottomed out with the lowest total fertility rate in the world, at an average of 1.08 children per woman." Things have since recovered somewhat. The 2011 estimate for total fertility rate is 1.23. That still makes for a fast-declining and aging population, though — surely not the ideal solution to the problem of sex ratio imbalances.
What of the issue of angry young surplus males unable to find wives? Ms. Hvistendahl takes a less alarmist view than the one put forth by Hudson and den Boer in their 2004 book Bare Branches. That there is a causal relationship from excess males to political despotism, as those authors argued, is not well supported by historical evidence. As Hvistendahl notes: "Adolf Hitler came to power at a time when Germany had over two million more women than men as a result of the toll taken by World War I." (She might have added that the most authoritarian episode in recent Indian history was the 1975-77 "Emergency," instigated by a female Prime Minister at a time of normal adult sex ratios.) One feels intuitively that a surplus of sex-starved young men will generate trouble, but on the evidence so far, things may not go beyond domestic disorders of the containable kind.
Ms. Hvistendahl seems to be of conventionally feminist-leftist opinions, but she has visible trouble keeping those opinions in order when writing about sex-ratio imbalances. She of course favors "reproductive rights," yet cannot but deplore the fact that those rights, extended to Third World peasant cultures, have led to a holocaust of female babies and the trafficking of young women from poorer places with low male-female ratios, to wealthier places with high ones.
She works hard to develop a thesis about it all having been the fault of Western imperialists terrified of the breeding potential of poorer, darker peoples, in cahoots with opportunistic Third World dictators hungry for World Bank cash, but she cannot quite square the ideological circle. As she points out, abortion was frowned on throughout Asia until modern times. (Chinese people used to consider themselves one year old at birth: older Chinese still reckon their birthdays in this way.) Where would "reproductive rights" be in Asia if not for those meddling imperialists?
These blemishes are minor, though, and probably inevitable in any book written by a college-educated young woman of our time. If you skip over them, you will find a wealth of research and much good narrative journalism in Unnatural Selection. The occasional feminist, leftist, and anti-American editorializing aside, this is a rich and valuable book on an important topic. David Hume would have admired Hvistendahl's respect for the data, even when it leads to conclusions that make hay of her prejudices. Rousseau would have applauded her egalitarian passions. Thomas Malthus, had he read the book, would have been tearing his hair out.

Birch: It is heavy, similar to maple, the grain is fine and close and the texture is even. It is adaptable to fine finishes, easy to work with and can be stained and finished to resemble many expensive and imported woods.
Cherry: The heartwood of cherry varies from rich red to reddish brown and will darken with age and on exposure to light. In contrast, the sapwood is creamy white. The wood has a fine uniform, straight grain, satiny, smooth texture, and may naturally contain brown pith flecks.
Mahogany: Comes in many different varieties. Strong and tough and uniform in structure with close moderately open grain. Possesses excellent physical and woodworking qualities. It ranges from a light pink to yellow, but on exposure to light and air, quickly turns to a reddish brown or sherry color.
Maple: Hard or "sugar," maple is elastic and very strong. It is one of the hardest of the common woods. The grain is straight with occasional wavy, curly, bird's eye patterns that are much prized in veneers. The natural color is white to amber. Maple is sometimes finished to simulate cherry wood.
Metal: Core construction is with metals.
Oak or Ash: Oak is very tough, strong, and hard and can live up to the every day abuse furniture takes and it has a pronounced grain. White ash is a ring-porous, hardwood of great strength. It is used for furniture frames and hidden parts. Brown ash has strong grain character and is used for veneers.
Painted: Can be solid wood or a wood like product that is painted.
Pine: Soft wood that is white or pale yellow. Knotty pine is used extensively for paneling and plywood, cabinets and doors. Dries easily and does not shrink or swell much with changes in humidity. One of the least expensive woods for furniture production.
Walnut: Because of its rich brown color, hardness and grain Walnut is a prized furniture and carving wood. Walnut burls are commonly used to created turned pieces along with veneers or thin Walnut slices.
Other: Woods not classified above

Joint use is a way to increase opportunities for children and adults to be more physically active. It refers to two or more entities — usually a school and a city or private organization — sharing indoor and outdoor spaces like gymnasiums, athletic fields and playgrounds. The concept is simple: share resources to keep costs down and communities healthy.
Examples of joint use agreements:
A principal unlocks the school gate after hours so neighbors can shoot hoops or play ball on evenings and weekends.
A school and swim team share a pool.
A school opens its soccer field to a local league for weekend games.
A YMCA opens its gym to the local PE teacher so students have a place to exercise.
Why is joint use needed?
The research is clear: the more active children are, the healthier they will be now and when they grow up. Yet certain places make physical activity harder instead of easier. Place matters since experts now know that where we live, work and play — the physical environment itself — determines, to a large degree, whether we will be healthy.
Too often, kids find the gate to their school’s blacktop or basketball court locked after school hours, locking them out of opportunities to be active. Closing off recreational facilities after school leaves many children and families struggling to incorporate physical activity into their daily routines. They may live in an area without a nearby park or be unable to afford exercise equipment or a gym membership.
Joint use agreements can fix these problems. Joint use makes physical activity easier by providing kids and adults alike with safe, conveniently located and inviting places to exercise and play. Besides making sense from a health perspective, joint use agreements make sense financially because they build upon assets a community already has. Sharing existing space is cheaper and more efficient than duplicating the same facilities in other parts of the community.
Where is joint use happening?
Joint use is happening in cities throughout California and across the nation. In fact, the concept of joint use is not new. Schools have shared their land and facilities for community use for over 200 years. Most states, including California, have policies to encourage or require schools to make facilities open to the public. In California, a 2008 survey conducted by the Center for Cities and Schools revealed that close to 60 percent of responding school districts already have some type of joint use partnership, but thousands still do not.
How does it work?
Joint use agreements facilitate a partnership between two or more entities, often school districts and local government agencies (e.g. parks and recreation or nonprofit organizations, to open up spaces such as playgrounds, athletic fields, pools, and gymnasiums to the community outside of school hours or to open up community facilities to schools at a reduced cost or for free.
Joint use partnerships can be formal (based on a legal document) or informal (based on a handshake), but formal agreements offer increased protections for both the facility and the community group using the facility. Since school staffing can change over time, personal relationships are not the most secure way to guarantee access to facilities into the future. A formal agreement can also help prevent problems related to maintenance, operations, liability, ownership or cost from arising.
Maintenance– How can we keep the space in good condition? Joint use agreements can detail each partner’s goals to help ensure that school properties are respected and maintained. When school resources are being shared, it’s important to have joint use agreements that specify who needs to make repairs and who will address wear and tear to the property. Some school officials have noticed a decrease in vandalism since implementing a joint use agreement. They have noted that when the community shares school resources, they take pride and ownership in the space, which can help deter vandalism.
Operations — Who will unlock the gate? Who will run the programs? These questions can be answered with joint use agreements so that partners know what they are responsible for.
Liability–What if someone gets hurt? Experts say most schools’ existing liability insurance is sufficient to cover any liability issues associated with joint use. Joint use agreements can identify liability concerns and make sure they are accounted for.
Ownership– How does joint use affect how decisions are made about the property? Joint use agreements should outline a process for resolving any conflicts that may surface. They should also highlight how the partnership will benefit each party.
Cost– How expensive will the partnership be? Joint use agreements can be used to define how much each partner contributes. Partnerships do not need to cost a lot to be successful. Agreements can help partners anticipates what costs might be.

Source: Steven Maxwell, 785-532-5740, firstname.lastname@example.org.
Note to editor: This is the first in a series of news releases about the color purple in honor of Kansas State University's founding on Feb. 16, 1863.
News release prepared by: Greg Tammen, 785-532-2535, email@example.com
Monday, Feb. 7, 2011
The power of purple:
ROCK MUSIC'S ROOTS RUN DEEP WITH PURPLE, PROFESSOR SAYS
MANHATTAN -- Ask Steven Maxwell what the color purple means and his answer is simple: turn the volume to 11 and open your mind, because purple is rock and roll in its prime.
"Artistically purple is a descriptive word, and I think that's why it's been adopted by some successful acts in the music world," said Maxwell, assistant professor of music at Kansas State University.
In 2008 Maxwell created a class about the history of rock and roll, where he teaches about the genre's evolution and its relationship to history.
"The really cool thing about rock and roll is that it ties into the American culture and really reflects what's going on in the country," Maxwell said. "It serves as the voice of the common person and has been associated with some important historical moments in the U.S. It was a part of that voice in the civil rights movement in the '60s and used in protest of the Vietnam War in the '70s."
Rock music's history runs purple, with the color being adopted by some of the most influential musicians.
"Think of the deeper concept of what a song like 'Purple Haze' means, especially when it first came out," Maxwell said. "The late '60s was all about looking at things differently. Jimi Hendrix perfectly captured that psychedelic era in the country, that time of opening the doors of perception in one's mind and really looking at something on a deeper level."
He said the "purple" Hendrix is referring to is that new, unknown, almost analogous way of thinking.
"Metaphorically, purple was a blend between the standardized 'primary colors' introduced by mainstream society in the 1950s and mid-1960s," Maxwell said.
Other artists, such as Deep Purple and Prince, adopted the color because of its ambiguity in the musical soundscape and pop culture.
Deep Purple was one of the pioneers of hard rock and heavy metal, Maxwell said. The group was the first rock band to record with a full Concerto orchestra, as well as the first to turn the volume to 11, a feat earning them the title of the world's loudest band by the Guinness Book of World Records in 1972.
And then there's the song "Smoke on the Water."
"When that song came out it was such a fresh thing," Maxwell said. "No longer was the focus just on the lyrics. That guitar riff made the music as important as the words. Today most people don't remember the lyrics but they know that guitar lick."
In 1984 Prince released "Purple Rain," an album that took the newly introduced music video to the next level as a full-length film.
The album also introduced Prince's backing band. The Revolution, an apt title due to the soundtrack's revolutionary nature, Maxwell said. The album has since been seen as an avant-garde piece of work and has been named one of the greatest albums of all time by outlets like Time magazine, Rolling Stone, VH1 and others.
"Purple's taking the softness of blue, the loudness of red, and meeting in the middle to make things a little ambiguous. It's a blend of those two primary colors and is therefore a different way of looking at things," he said.

and the operational
deployment of the West African Regiment
On the outbreak
of war in August 1914 the Allies quickly moved against German possessions in West Africa.
Togoland was seized (see: http://www.kaiserscross.com/188001/300143.html
) and the large colony of Kamerun was attacked.
In Kamerun initial British attacks across the Nigerian border were
repulsed by the Germans, but an amphibious assault on Douala seized that port on 27th September 1914. The allied commander, Brigadier General Sir
C.M. Dobell CMG, DSO, then ordered two columns to move north and attack Susa and Yabasi (sometimes
spelt as Jabassi.) Yabasi lay 50 miles (80
kilometres) up the Wuri
River which was
navigable. The Royal Navy was tasked
with transporting the column to Yabasi.
Column Commander was Brevet Colonel E.H. Gorges DSO, the Commandant of the West
African Regiment. Colonel Gorges force
consisted of a land party under Lieutenant Colonel E. Vaughan (Manchester
Regiment and West African Regiment) who commanded:
2 sections of
mountain artillery, one section each coming from the Sierra Leone Battery and the Gold
Coast Battery, West African Frontier Force (WAFF).
plus 2 machine guns from the West
African Regiment 2 companies
from the 1st Nigeria
Half of the
Pioneer Company of the Gold Coast
medical detachments and 688 porters.
the Royal Navy, under Commander the Honourable B.T.C.O. Freeman-Mitford, was a
flotilla comprised of:
Mole a dredger armed with a 6-inch gun.
Dreadnought a lighter also mounting a 6-inch gun.
Balbus a steam tug that towed the Dreadnought and carried three 1-pounder guns.
boat from HMS Cumberland, armed with
one 3-pounder gun and a machine gun.
The steam launches
Sokoto, Crocodile and Alligator,
each armed with one machine gun.
gun and detachment for employment on land.
guns and crews came from HMS Challenger at
The West African Regiment (WAR)
in Sierra Leone
was one of the Royal Navy’s most important harbours and bases, and it needed an
effective garrison. White troops sent
there were decimated by fever and had to be replaced by battalions of the West
India Regiment from the Caribbean. Internal unrest in Sierra Leone caused the British to
raise a local infantry regiment in the colony in 1896 titled the West African
The WAR was an
Imperial unit; that meant that its cost was born by the British War Office and
not by colonial revenues raised in Sierra Leone. The regiment’s primary role was to defend the
colony’s capital Freetown,
but it was also available for operations anywhere in the world. The regiment raised twelve companies of
infantrymen from tribes in the Sierra
Leone interior. The unit strength was: 60 British seconded officers,
25 British seconded Non Commissioned Officers (NCOs) and 1,500 African rank and
file. The regimental march was Rule Britannia.
In the early
days the regiment was dressed in a blue single-breasted tunic with five gilt
buttons and standing collar, knee-length baggy blue breeches, a low red fez for
headdress and a brown belt with two pouches.
Boots and gaiters were not issued or used. The soldiers were armed with the .303-inch
Lee Metford magazine rifle.
By 1914 the
soldiers were wearing a khaki flannel smock and calf-length breeches, but the
men still fought in bare feet. The rifle
in use was the Short Magazine Lee Enfield, and two machine guns had been issued
to the regiment. In Kamerun the red fez
was replaced by a green Kilmarnock hat and the
belt and pouches were replaced with M08 web equipment.
In pre-war days
the WAR had deployed five companies into the interior of Sierra Leone, and had stationed the regimental
headquarters and seven companies at Wilberforce, outside Freetown.
The West African Regiment should not be confused with the Sierra Leone
Battalion of the West African Frontier Force, which was a colonially-funded,
directed and administered unit.
The approach up the Wuri River
up-river started on 7th October and was enlivened by canoe-loads of
villagers trying to cling on to the vessels to get a free ride. Some of the canoe men climbed aboard the
Royal Navy craft to search for removable objects, and they had to be
ejected. As the long snake of vessels,
led by the flagship Mole, passed
Bosida the ‘King’ (head chief) of the region came aboard for a visit. He had been hiding in the bush for three days
as the withdrawing Germans were hanging anyone in authority who was thought to
favour the Allies.
Left: The Wuri River at Yabasi
As Nsake Fort
was reached, 10 miles (16 kilometres) south of Yabasi, the flotilla came under enemy
rifle fire. Machine gun and 3-pounder
fire sprayed and bombarded the fort in reply.
A company of WAR disembarked and seized the fort which was found to be
empty. Local villagers advised that the
enemy had quickly withdrawn up-river to Yabasi.
Deployment into action at Yabasi
defenders of Yabasi were the 1st (Depot) Company of the Schutztruppe
supported by local policemen and local Europeans. Knowing that the British flotilla was on its
way towards them they had planned a sound defence, and they wanted to fight.
into the flotilla’s sight at 0800 hours on 7th October, and shortly
afterwards the effects of the hot tropical sun began to be felt by the entire British
column. The Mole and the Dreadnought
bombarded Yabasi town whilst the troops disembarked on the west side of the
river. The east side was thought to be
too swampy and no British troops landed there.
This was a big mistake.
ordered Lieutenant Colonel Vaughan to advance with a main body of 4 companies
and the machine gun section WAR, the Gold Coast pioneers and the Gold Coast
mountain artillery. The remaining sub-units
and the naval 12-pounder gun were held in reserve.
At this time
the flotilla noticed enemy movement on the east bank. A message was despatched to Colonel Gorges
but it either did not arrive or was ignored.
Lieutenant Colonel Vaughan
was now ordered to seize a mound south of the town whilst Captain E. S. Brand (Royal
Fusiliers and WAR) led a left-flanking attack (see sketch map). The mound was evacuated by the enemy and the
British occupied it.
machine gunners on both sides of the river opened fire on the flotilla and on the
British troops on the mound. Enemy rounds
hit the gun mountings on the vessels, forcing Commander Freeman-Mitford to
withdraw his flotilla down-river out of range.
This denied Colonel Gorges the naval gun fire support that he had been
counting on. The tug Balbus had disobeyed orders and pushed
her way too far upstream, and as she withdrew she ran aground on an island and
had to be abandoned. The navy was now pre-occupied
with emptying Balbus of her guns and
other loose items. Things were going
Disaster on the British left flank
ordered the naval 12-pounder to be dragged onto the mound by the naval gun
detachment and some accompanying Royal Marines.
He then went to inspect his left flank attack, as it appeared to be
The troops on
the left flank were in disarray. They
had advanced through a swamp to a river which could only be crossed by one
bridge. German machine gunners had a
clear field of fire from Yabasi and were knocking down anyone approaching the
bridge. Captain Brand was dead along
with Staff Sergeant (Armourer) Frederick C. Wade (Royal Army Ordnance Corps and
WAR) and Colour Sergeant Hector McGuirk (King’s Own Yorkshire Light Infantry
and WAR). Lieutenant R.D. Bennett
(Middlesex Regiment), the WAR Machine Gun Officer, was severely wounded. Twelve African soldiers had also been killed
and 19 others wounded; many of these casualties were WAR machine gunners. On the river five British sailors had been
Left: Captain Ernest Stanley Brand
on the left flank were now either thrashing around in tall elephant grass or
were unwilling to face the German machine guns.
Tactical unity had been lost. A
company of the 1st Nigeria Regiment was ordered to mount another
flanking attack with the intention of going further to the west and getting
onto ground beyond the bridge. But direction
was lost in the thick, swampy bush and the Nigerians emerged behind the WAR
instead of in front and to the left.
Colonel Gorges now
turned to what he perceived to be his trump card, the naval detachment on the
mound; here he found the men prostrated with exhaustion. Having no real idea of the physical demands
made by bush warfare, the naval detachment had thought that it could haul the
12-pounder gun and ammunition without the assistance of local porters. To compound this situation the detachment had
been ordered into action wearing heavy marching order. The result was that although the 12-pounder
was on the mound, the gunners were too exhausted to man it efficiently and the
marines were too exhausted to fight forward.
As dusk was now
approaching a British retirement was ordered.
The men re-embarked and the flotilla, less Balbus, sailed back down-river to Nsake for the night. It then returned to Douala.
The second British attack on Yabasi
ordered an immediate second assault on Yabasi.
The WAR was rested and Colonel Gorges was given another column
The Nigerian Mountain Artillery Battery
(less one section) WAFF.
from the Gold Coast Mountain Artillery
Battalion The Nigeria
Regiment under Lieutenant Colonel J.B. Cockburn (Royal Welch Fusiliers and Nigeria
A Composite Battalion consisting of 2
companies of the Sierra Leone Battalion WAFF and 2 companies of the Gold Coast
Regiment WAFF, under Lieutenant Colonel R.A. de B. Rose (Worcester Regiment and
Gold Coast Regiment, WAFF).
from the Pioneer Company of the Gold
Medical detachments and 450 porters.
flotilla, again under Commander Mitford, was similar to the previous one but
this time 100 porters accompanied the 12-pounder gun.
October the Composite Battalion was landed on both banks of the river at Nsake
and advanced. Officers’ patrols located
the enemy near Yabasi also on both banks of the river, as before. The following morning 1st Nigeria
Regiment (less one company), one section of Gold Coast Pioneers, the Nigerian
mountain gunners and the naval 12-pounder detachment were landed on the west
side of the river south of Yabasi. Lieutenant Colonel Cockburn was tasked with
getting behind and to the north of Yabasi by making a wide left flanking
approach. The remainder of the column
was held afloat by Colonel Gorges so that he could reinforce either bank of the
By 1300 hours
the British troops on both banks were in contact with the enemy who was fighting
a withdrawing action. The flotilla
provided fire support and by 1500 hours Yabasi was encircled. One hour later
the British held all the enemy trenches.
Ten enemy prisoners were taken by 1st Nigeria Regiment. The British had lost 2 men wounded and one
British NCO who died from the effects of the sun.
On the 15th
October British patrols ascertained that the Germans were retreating towards
Nyamtam, and there was some inconclusive skirmishing. The flotilla successfully salved the Balbus, although it had to be sent to Nigeria
for a refit. The 1st Bn The Nigeria
Regiment was left to garrison the Yabasi area and the remainder of the column
returned to Douala. The British dead from the first attack were
buried in Douala Cemetery.
At Yabasi the
British troops learned to respect German machine gunnery. Experience acquired the hard way during the
failed first attack helped the second attack to succeed.
African Regiment continued operating in Kamerun and was a useful unit. After the conquest of the territory the WAR
provided garrison troops for Kamerun, Togo and Gambia,
and internal security troops for northern Nigeria. During the Great War 7 British officers and
Non Commissioned Officers were killed in action and 4 others were wounded or
injured; 27 African soldiers were killed, 17 died of disease and 41 were
Colonel Gorges was
appointed to be a Companion of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath (CB) and a
Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (CBE). Two
officers in the WAR were awarded Military Crosses. Five British officers and eight Sierra
Leonian soldiers were Mentioned in Despatches.
Being Imperial troops the soldiers in the WAR were unfortunately not
eligible to receive the African Distinguished Conduct Medal (DCM) which was awarded to WAFF soldiers, and none
were considered for the Imperial DCM.
honours awarded to the regiment were: Sierra Leone 1897-98; Ashanti 1900; Cameroons 1914-16; and Duala. In 1928
the regiment was disbanded as a cost-cutting measure. At the time of disbandment the Prince of
Wales was the Colonel-in-Chief. This was
sad end to a colonial Imperial unit that had served Britain well.
The Great War in West Africa
by Brigadier General E.
Howard Gorges CB, CBE, DSO.
Official History. Military Operations Togoland and
the Cameroons by Brigadier General F.J. Moberly CB, CSI, DSO.
The History of the Royal West African Frontier
Force by Colonel A.
Haywood CMG, CBE, DSO and
Brigadier F.A.S. Clarke DSO.
The Naval Review 1915. Imperial Sunset.
Frontier Soldiering in the 20th Century by James Lunt.
Colonial Armies. Africa
1850 to 1918 by Peter
The Empire at War by Sir Charles Lucas KCB, KCMG.

Space > Space Shuttle-3rd Edition
Space Shuttle-3rd Edition
The eighty year history of developing reusable lifting-reentry spacecraft. From the early works of Eugen Sanger in Germany to the Cold War developments in the US, then finally to the ultimate experiment - the Space Shuttle. To celebrate the 20th anniversary of the first Space Shuttle launch, this greatly enlarged third edition adds many previously uncovered early designs, details the latest modifications to the operational vehicles, and provides expanded coverage of the first 100 Space Shuttle missions.
Search for more items by this author:
Dennis R. Jenkins
Space Shuttle-3rd Edition from Specialty Press

Information contained on this page is provided by an independent third-party content provider. WorldNow and this Station make no warranties or representations in connection therewith. If you have any questions or comments about this page please contact email@example.com.
SOURCE Ford Motor Company
DEARBORN, Mich., March 22, 2013 /PRNewswire/ --
Ford reduced the average amount of water used to make each vehicle by 8.5 percent between 2011 and 2012 – putting the company more than halfway toward its current goal of using an average of just 4 cubic meters per vehicle globally by 2015.
Since 2000, Ford has reduced the amount of water it uses in everything from cooling towers to parts washing and paint operations by 10.6 billion gallons, or 62 percent. That's equal to the amount of water used by nearly 99,000 U.S. residences annually, or enough to fill 16,000 Olympic-size pools. Ford's reduced consumption rates mean even more to regions around the world struggling with water-related issues like drought and extensive population growth.
Ford's water reduction success is a result of the company's commitment to reduce the amount of water it uses by aggressively monitoring and managing just about every drop of water going into and out of its facilities and properties, says Andy Hobbs, director, Environmental Quality Office.
Since 2000, Ford decreased the total amount of water used around the world annually from 64 million cubic meters to 24 million cubic meters.
"That's about 10.6 billion gallons of water that was conserved and went to use somewhere else," says Hobbs.
Ford voluntarily launched its Global Water Management Initiative in 2000, putting in place ways to manage water conservation, quality and reuse of storm and process water. Ford's water strategy complements the company's overall Code of Human Rights, Basic Working Conditions and Corporate Responsibilities.
"Ford recognizes the critical importance of water, and is committed to conserving water and using it responsibly," says Robert Brown, vice president, Sustainability, Environment and Safety Engineering. "Many vehicle manufacturing processes require water and the resource is used at every point in our supply chain."
Ford aims to use an average of 1,056 gallons of water to make each vehicle globally – consistent with its overall goal of a 30 percent reduction in the amount of water used per vehicle between 2009 and 2015. That is slightly more than the 1,000 gallons fire engine tankers in the U.S. are required to contain in their tanks. One cubic meter of water is equal to 264 gallons.
Continuing the progress
Ford had a positive impact on the world's water supply in many ways during 2012. The Ford Fund, for example, supported 19 different water-related projects in China, Indonesia, Thailand, Philippines, India, Germany and South Africa.
One project in arid Southwest China, for instance, involved 60 Ford employees from Nanjing, who helped eight families build water cellars designed to capture water during the rainy season to store and use during drier times of the year.
At the same time, Ford's biggest water-related projects were within its own facilities and included:
These accomplishments reflect Ford's overall approach to water use, which emphasizes several goals:
More information about Ford's water use-related efforts can be found in the company's annual sustainability report that is released annually every June. The most recent version can be found here.
About Ford Motor Company
Ford Motor Company (NYSE: F), a global automotive industry leader based in Dearborn, Mich., manufactures or distributes automobiles across six continents. With about 171,000 employees and 65 plants worldwide, the company's automotive brands include Ford and Lincoln. The company provides financial services through Ford Motor Credit Company. For more information regarding Ford and its products worldwide, please visit http://corporate.ford.com.
©2012 PR Newswire. All Rights Reserved.

In addition, health issues, such as pain, asthma, restless legs syndrome, and back problems, also can contribute to lack of sleep. So can some medications, such as decongestants, steroids and some medicines for high blood pressure, asthma or depression.
Secrets of good sleep
You can take steps to shift your body and mind into more beneficial sleep habits:
- Keep your bedroom dark, quiet, comfortable and cool. “Making your bedroom a sanctuary conducive for sleep can make a significant difference in the quality of sleep you get,” says Dr. Wolfson.
- Go to sleep and wake up at the same time, even on weekends. Doing so helps keep your internal “circadian clock” in balance, which signals your body to sleep and wake in a regular pattern.
- Establish a regular, relaxing bedtime routine that might include reading a book, listening to soothing music or doing something else you find relaxing. “A relaxing, routine activity right before bedtime helps separate your sleep time from activities that can make it more difficult to fall asleep or remain asleep,” says Dr. Wolfson. “Parents know that a bedtime routine can help children get a good night’s sleep. Doing the same for themselves can have the same results.”
- Make sure your mattress is comfortable and supportive. Good-quality mattresses generally last about 10 years. Have comfortable pillows and make the room attractive and inviting.
- Avoid caffeine close to bedtime. Caffeine products, such as coffee, tea and colas, remain in the body, on average, from three to five hours, but they can affect some people up to 12 hours later.
- Avoid alcohol close to bedtime. Many people think of alcohol as a sedative, but it actually disrupts sleep, causing nighttime awakenings.
- Quit smoking. Nicotine is a stimulant that can make it more difficult for smokers to fall asleep, stay asleep and wake in the morning. Smokers should never smoke in bed or when they’re sleepy.
- Finish eating at least two or three hours before your regular bedtime. Be aware that large, high-fat or spicy meals may cause heartburn, which leads to difficulty falling asleep and discomfort during the night.
- Exercise regularly but complete your workout at least a few hours before bedtime. Exercising regularly makes it easier to fall asleep and contributes to sounder sleep. However, working out right before going to bed will make falling asleep more difficult.
- Find ways to manage stress and anxiety. Relaxation exercises, meditation or deep breathing work for many people.
“If there are problems or issues keeping you awake, try writing them in a notebook and putting it away,” suggests Dr. Wolfson. “That way, you’ve registered your concerns but become free to put them aside until morning.”
When to seek help
If your sleep problems persist for longer than a week and are bothersome, or if sleepiness interferes with the way you feel or function during the day, don’t self-medicate with sleeping pills; make an appointment with your doctor.
“The key to better sleep is recognizing you’re not getting enough deep, restorative sleep, and then doing something about it,” says Dr. Wolfson. “Failure to do so puts you and others at risk.”

Most Active Stories
Sun September 25, 2011
Launch Logistics: Speedy Rocket, Slow Electronics
Weird things jump out at me in press releases.
Take the press kit NASA prepared for the GRAIL mission. GRAIL consists of two nearly identical spacecraft that are on their way to the moon. Once there, they will make a precise map of the moon's gravitational field. Such a map will help scientists refine their theories about how the moon formed and what the interior is made of.
So I'm reading through the GRAIL press kit, learning about the size of the spacecraft (washing machine-sized), how long it will take to make the map (approximately three months), and where the mission control room is (at a Lockheed Martin facility just outside of Denver).
I also learn that GRAIL can launch any day between Sept. 9 and Oct. 19. And then I get to this sentence:
"On each day, there are two separate, instantaneous launch opportunities separated in time by approximately 39 minutes."
That's weird. Now, I wasn't surprised that this mission had an extremely precise launch opportunity — "instantaneous" means the launch window is essentially a second long. I know you have to wait until the moon's orbit around the Earth, and Earth's orbit around the sun, and the Earth's rotation around its axis are all in exactly the right position before you can launch your rocket.
But what's up with two instantaneous launch opportunities. Why 39 minutes apart?
I called the NASA press office. They were stumped and promised they'd find someone who could give me the answer. In the meantime, I called several universities with large aerospace programs, and asked if anyone there had the answer.
Nope. Nada. Nothing.
So now this is beginning to bug me. I'm also beginning to worry. If an aerospace engineer can't figure this out, how am I ever going to understand it?
While I'm pondering this, GRAIL deputy project manager Tom Hoffman called. I asked him about the two instantaneous launch opportunities.
"It's a pretty simple answer not driven by the mission at all," Hoffman told me. "It's driven by the launch vehicle."
The launch vehicle? Not orbital mechanics or a complex trajectory? The problem, Hoffman said, is some slow electronics.
There is actually a launch window of 40 minutes or so each day. Modern computers in modern rockets can calculate the precise direction the rocket needs to launch on a second-by-second basis. But GRAIL was launching on a Delta II rocket, and Hoffman told me the Delta II rocket is a rather old design. It's been around for more than 20 years, "and so the rocket just can't, it can't do that internally, in its own computer system. It basically has to be fed all the information," he said.
Hoffman said it takes about 39 minutes to load in the new information, and then check to make sure that it was loaded correctly.
Not the answer I was expecting, but there's something oddly pleasing about a brand-new space mission launching with some rather old electronics.
Whatever works ... as the saying goes.

What is the Keystone XL Pipeline?
The 1,700-mile long Keystone XL Pipeline would connect the Alberta oil sand fields in Canada to refineries in Texas. The multi-billion dollar project is being proposed by TransCanada, a Canadian energy company. TransCanada has been attempting to get a permit for the pipeline for over three years. The proposed line would travel through six U.S. states: Montana, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas. The line would cross through 16 counties in North and East Texas. The pipeline itself would be 36 inches around.
Since the pipeline crosses international borders, TransCanada needs to obtain a Presidential Permit through the State Department for construction of the portion of the pipeline that goes from Canada to the U.S.
On February 27, 2012, TransCanada announced it would start construction on a section of its Keystone XL pipeline from Cushing, Oklahoma to Texas...

The aviation sector is renowned as a carbon intensive business, but an increasing number of airports are looking to change that by integrating the latest green-tech into their daily operations.
Air travel and transport accounts for two percent of all human generated greenhouse gas emissions, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) -- with airports contributing five percent to the overall aviation figure.
By adapting clean energy policies and technologies, eco-conscious airport operators hope to make a dent in these numbers and boost the industry's environmental street-cred.
"We are making our airports greener, while balancing the tremendous economic impacts they deliver for our region," says Amy Malick, deputy commissioner of sustainability for the Chicago Department of Aviation (CDA), which will host the fifth annual Airports Going Green conference this November.
The conference provides a platform for over 400 airport executives and green thinkers from around the world to present programs, strategies, and lessons-learned regarding airport sustainability.
"(We are) committed to implementing sustainable initiatives at our airports that enhance the quality of life for citizens," she adds.
Malick highlights how the CDA has installed over 230,000 square feet of vegetated roof space at Chicago O'Hare and Midway International Airport, ensured all Chicago airport trucks are fueled with ultra-low sulfur diesel gas and insisted recycled materials are utilized in all airports when possible.
As a result, the CDA has saved 76,000 tons of CO2 from being pumped out by Chicago's airports alone, she claims.
Across the U.S. like-minded schemes are taking off with increasing regularity. Airports such as Boston Logan and Denver International now generate a small percentage of their energy requirements from renewable energy sources (such as on site wind and solar).
In Europe meanwhile 64 airports have joined the Airport Carbon Accreditation program, which recognizes innovative eco-airport efforts. A further five sites have signed up to the scheme in Asia.

Hands on activityThe English designer William Morris was influenced by Indian patterns when he designed this block printed cotton fabric in 1883. Other British designers used Indian patterns, such as 'Paisley'. Using factories, British cloth makers were able to make cheaper fabrics and sell it in India in Victorian times. Indian weavers spun, wove and decorated their cloth in their own homes and this made it more expensive, so many of them went out of business. Have a look at the images below. They show some designs, cloth printing and the blocks used to print cloths.
You would need to print with your block thousands of time to decorate a large piece of cloth by hand. You can make a printing block using a potato - it's much easier to carve than wood!
You will need:
a big potato
paper for your pattern
a small knife with a pointed end or a scalpel
fabric paints or dyes - use indigo, turmeric or henna if you want to make authentic Indian colours
paper plates for mixing colours
1. Cut your potato in half and leave it to dry for a few hours. If you want, you can slice off the edges to make a square, which will be easier to line up when you print. You can also use a polystyrene ceiling tile, with the pattern drawn into it. You can buy real wood printing blocks in some Indian shops if you want to print from wood.
2. Design your printing block pattern on thin white paper, filling in the areas to be cut out. Remember to make the pattern no larger than the potato. Cut the paper 1 centimetre bigger than the design.
3. Tape your paper design onto the dry potato.
4. Get an adult to help with this part. Using the sharp knife or scalpel, cut out your design.
5. Mix your dyes or fabric paints on the paper plate. If you are using an Indian dye such as turmeric make it into quite a thick paste.
6. Paint the dye onto your potato block, or press the block into the dye on the plate.
7. Practice printing the block on some scrap paper before you try it on the fabric.
8. Print the pattern onto the fabric. It looks best when you print repeated patterns, or try different colours next to each other. Keep the patterns in line using a long ruler.
9. Leave the fabric to dry.
Need some inspiration?
Have a look at the some Victorian paisley patterns.
You can have a go at a block printing activity in this Museum Open Learning Initiative activity.
Wooden blocks are available ready made from Parrotfish.
Have a look at some William Morris designs and download some wallpaper.

Age: 2-5 years
Little ones can make flowers using muffin liners, glitter glue and buttons.
What You Need:
•Glue (we used glitter glue)
•Muffin liners (we used some plain and some silver)
What You Do:
- Let your little ones put glue on the construction paper whereever they would like to put a "flower".
- Have them place a muffin liner on the glue. Repeat.
- Encourage your child/student to put a dab of glue in the center of the muffin liner.
- Then, have them place a button on the glue dab.
- To complete the picture, little ones can use markers to draw stems and leaves on the construction paper.
www.KinderArt.com | www.KinderArtLittles.com
© Andrea Mulder-Slater and KinderArt ®

Protecting your home against winter's 'silent killer'
(BPT) - It’s colorless, odorless and the No. 1 cause of accidental poisoning in the United States. And, it worsens in the winter.
Known as the “silent killer,” carbon monoxide (CO) is responsible for an average of 450 deaths and 20,000 emergency room visits each year, according to the Journal of the American Medical Association. With more than two-fifths of all CO poisonings occurring between December and February, homeowners are at increased risk once temperatures begin to drop.
“During the winter months, many families turn to heating sources they might not use at other times of the year,” says Deborah Hanson, director of external affairs for First Alert, the most trusted name in home safety. “While these heating sources may be effective at providing warmth, they also can pose great risks if not used properly. To help protect loved ones from the dangers of CO poisoning, it is important for homeowners to take proper precautions when dealing with any kind of fuel-burning heat source.”
First Alert recommends the following tips and tools for keeping your home and loved ones warm – and safe – this winter and all year long:
Protect against CO poisoning
Run kitchen vents or exhaust fans any time the stove is in use. The kitchen stove is among the most frequent sources of CO poisoning in the home. To help eliminate danger of overexposure, never use the oven to heat a home. Always run exhaust fans when cooking, especially during the holidays when stoves are left on for longer periods of time. Also, open a nearby window periodically when cooking to allow fresh air to circulate.
Never use generators indoors. In the case of a power outage, portable electricity generators must be used outside only with power brought into the structure with a cord. Never use them inside the home, in a garage or in any confined area that can allow CO to collect. And be careful to follow operating instructions closely. Also refrain from using charcoal grills, camp stoves or other similar devices indoors.
Have fuel-burning appliances inspected regularly. Arrange for a professional inspection of all fireplaces and fuel-burning appliances – such as furnaces, stoves, clothes dryers, water heaters and space heaters – annually to detect any CO leaks.
Be mindful of the garage. Warming the car in the morning before work is common during the winter months, but running vehicles inside an attached garage, even if the door is open, is hazardous, as CO can leak into the home.
Install/test CO alarms. Carbon monoxide alarms are the only way to detect this poisonous gas in a home. For maximum protection, alarms should be installed on every level of the home and near each sleeping area. Test alarm function monthly and change batteries every six months. In addition, alarms should be replaced every five to seven years to ensure proper function. If the installation date is unknown, replace immediately.
For more information on carbon monoxide safety, visit www.firstalert.com.

Mary Anne Dunkin
Louise Chang, MD
Two decades ago, if you had moderate to severe Crohn's, there were few treatment options. In the late 1990s, however, the first in a new class of treatment options emerged for Crohn's disease. Referred to as biologic response modifiers, biologic agents, or simply biologics, these drugs target specific parts of an overactive immune system to reduce inflammation.
Biologics not only relieve Crohn's symptoms but also can bring about remission and keep you in remission. They are indicated for use when someone has moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease and has not responded well to other Crohn’s disease treatments. Many people with Crohn's now live with significantly fewer symptoms, but may worry about side effects. Here's a look at the risks and benefits of biologics.
In Crohn's disease, an overactive immune system causes inflammation and damage to the digestive tract. Made from living organisms, biologics work just like substances made by the body’s immune system and can help control the immune system response.
Four biologics are FDA approved for Crohn's. Three of the four block a protein called tumor necrosis factor (TNF) that's involved in inflammation. These drugs are often called anti-TNF drugs or TNF inhibitors. They include Cimzia (certolizumab), Humira (adalimumab), and Remicade (infliximab).
The fourth medication, Tysabri (natalizumab), is called an integrin receptor antagonist. It blocks certain types of white blood cells that are involved in inflammation.
Because they suppress the immune system, all biologics carry an increased risk of infections, which in rare cases can be serious. Cimzia, Humira, and Remicade carry a boxed warning for increased risk of serious infections leading to hospitalization or death. If someone taking a biologic develops a serious infection, the drug should be discontinued. People with tuberculosis, heart failure, or multiple sclerosis should not take biologics because they can bring on these conditions or make them worse.
In rare cases, some people taking TNF inhibitors have developed certain cancers such as lymphoma. Lymphoma is a type of cancer that affects the lymph system, which is part of the body’s immune system.
Tysabri increases the risk of a very rare but potentially fatal brain infection called progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). Tysabri also can cause allergic reactions and liver damage. Tysabri should not be used at the same time as other treatments that suppress the immune system or TNF inhibitors.
However, most infections that occur with biologic use are far less serious, says Richard Bloomfeld, MD, associate professor of medicine and director of the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Program at Wake Forest University School of Medicine in Winston Salem, N.C. "Infections such as colds, upper respiratory tract infections, and urinary tract infections are common and don't necessarily alter our treatment of Crohn's."
Other common side effects from biologic use include headache, flu-like symptoms, nausea, rash, injection site pain, and infusion reactions.
So who should take a biologic for Crohn's? Many gastroenterologists reserve these drugs for people who have not responded to conventional medications that suppress the immune system. But some gastroenterologists may treat Crohn's more aggressively.
"If you let inflammation go, inflammation leads to scarring and scarring leads to narrowing of the intestines, which becomes a surgical problem," says Prabhakar Swaroop, MD, assistant professor and director of the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Program at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. "You want to treat the person aggressively to prevent these problems."
"In addition to improving symptoms, the anti-TNF modifiers are associated with mucosal healing," says Bloomfeld. "We hope that in healing the mucosa we can stop the progression of the disease and prevent complications of Crohn's that result in hospitalization and surgery."
While there are other treatments that suppress the immune system to treat Crohn's, they too have side effects, says Bloomfeld. Like the biologics, drugs that suppress the immune system increase the risk of lymphomas and infections, which can be severe.
Cortiosteroids like prednisone, for example, can cause a wide range of adverse effects including weight gain, mood swings, bone loss, skin bruising, high blood pressure, and high blood sugar. Those side effects are why corticosteroids may be used to control a flare, but aren't the choice to treat Crohn's over a long period of time. "The stop-gap method, which is steroids, is something we cannot use long term," says Swaroop.
When prescribing any drug, doctors look at the potential risks against the benefits they hope or expect to achieve. Although doctors don't all share the same philosophy on when to start biologics for Crohn's disease, they do agree that biologics should be used when people have severe disease that can lead to permanent damage and make surgery unavoidable.
Swaroop says he looks for signs that the disease is progressing, such as how long between a person's diagnosis of Crohn's and when they have fistulas. "These are the patients who generally do better on biologics, who have the quality of life improvement, who are able to avoid surgery and get back in the workforce," he says.
Before prescribing biologics, doctors check for potential problems. "In the beginning, of course, we go ahead and make sure the person does not have an active liver infection or TB," says Marie Borum, MD, professor of medicine and director of the Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases at George Washington University in Washington, D.C.
Once someone starts a biologic, the doctor looks for side effects in order to find them before they become serious. Monitoring includes include lab tests and possibly regular skin checks for signs of skin cancer.
All effective therapies for Crohn's disease come with some risk, says Bloomfeld. "It is not an option not to treat Crohn's, so we certainly need to weigh these risks against the benefits of having the disease well treated."
"It may be challenging for the individual to consider all of these risk and benefits. They need to work with their gastroenterologist to decide what might be most beneficial for them and what risk they are willing to accept to effectively treat Crohn's disease," Bloomfeld says. "You have to be willing to accept some risk to adequately treat Crohn's disease."
SOURCES:Crohn's Colitis Foundation of America: "Biologic Therapies."Marie Borum, MD, professor of medicine; director, Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, George Washington University, Washington, D.C.Richard Bloomfeld, MD, associate professor of medicine; director, Inflammatory Bowel Disease Program, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston Salem, N.C.Prabhakar Swaroop, MD, assistant professor; director, Inflammatory Bowel Disease Program, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas.
Here are the most recent story comments.View All
The views expressed here do not necessarily represent those of NewsSource 16
The Health News section does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.

Posted: Oct 9, 2012 3:00 PM by Robert Preidt
TUESDAY, Oct. 9 (HealthDay News) -- A gene test that can identify people at risk for mouth cancer has been developed by British researchers.
The test detects precancerous cells in patients with benign-looking mouth lesions and could lead to earlier treatment for at-risk patients and improve their chances of survival, according to the team at Queen Mary, University of London.
They used the quantitative Malignancy Index Diagnostic System test -- which measures the level of 16 genes -- on more than 350 head and neck tissue specimens from nearly 300 patients and found that it had a cancer detection rate between 91 percent and 94 percent.
The study was published Oct. 4 in the International Journal of Cancer.
Mouth cancer affects more than half a million people worldwide each year, and that number is expected to rise above 1 million by 2030, according to World Health Organization figures. Most cases of mouth cancer are caused by either smoking or chewing tobacco, or drinking alcohol.
Mouth lesions are common, but only 5 percent to 30 percent may turn into cancers. Until now, no test has been able to accurately detect which lesions will become cancerous. Many mouth cancers are diagnosed at later stages, when the chances of survival are greatly reduced.
"A sensitive test capable of quantifying a patient's cancer risk is needed to avoid the adoption of a 'wait-and-see' intervention," study lead investigator and test inventor Dr. Muy-Teck Teh said in a university news release. "Detecting cancer early, coupled with appropriate treatment, can significantly improve patient outcomes, reduce mortality and alleviate long-term public health care costs."
Although this study shows that the test is effective for early cancer detection, further clinical trials are needed to evaluate its long-term clinical benefits.
The U.S. National Cancer Institute has more about mouth and other types of oral cancer.
SOURCE: Queen Mary, University of London, news release, Oct. 4, 2012
Copyright (c) 2012 HealthDay. All rights reserved.

Blood sugar is your body's primary source of fuel and plays a vital role in physical and mental well-being. But when it rises above normal, your health, your energy levels, and your weight-loss efforts are jeopardized.
Even before blood sugar levels reach the point of a type 2 diabetes diagnosis, the health problems can be serious. More and more research links even slightly high blood sugar to food cravings, mood swings, and excess weight, as well as pregnancy and fertility problems, heart attacks, stroke, and even some forms of cancer, early evidence suggests.
Good nutrition in general can help keep type 2 diabetes and high blood sugar at bay. But some specific foods and spices have been found to lower or help control blood sugar. Give these a taste.
Avocado. This fruit is rich in a particular kind of monounsaturated fat called oleic acid, which has been found to improve fat levels in the body and help control diabetes. Help yourself to another serving of avocado!
Beans. Many studies have shown that eating foods high in soluble fiber, particularly beans, reduces the rise in blood sugar after meals and delays the drop in blood sugar later on.
Cinnamon. Some alternative practitioners think that cinnamon may be helpful in making insulin receptors work better. Stir 1 teaspoon daily into a food or beverage. Other spices found to help the body use insulin more efficiently include bay leaf, clove, and turmeric.
Coffee. Regular drinkers may be less likely to develop diabetes, reveals a study from the University of Minnesota. Diabetes experts suspect that compounds and minerals in coffee beans may improve the sensitivity of insulin receptors and help the body process blood sugar more efficiently.
Orange. Studies indicate the soluble fiber and pectin in oranges can help control changes in blood sugar as well as help lower cholesterol.
Sweet potato. Despite its name -- and a flavor so luscious it makes a good dessert -- the sweet potato doesn't raise your blood sugar as high, or as fast, as a white potato.
Tea. Studies have shown that extracts of black tea may significantly reduce blood sugar levels. And enjoying a cup of chamomile tea may be more than a restful nighttime ritual -- the herb may help reduce blood sugar fluctuations.
For more healthy living news and features, visit PureMatters.com -- and don't forget to stop by the Pure Matters Shop for all your vitamin and supplement needs.
Source: Pure Matters http://www.purematters.com/prevention/diabetes/foods-that-help-balance-blood-sugar

Affton, Mo (KSDK) -- School leaders are teaching character education to prevent bullying.
Teachers and counselors at Mesnier Primary School in Affton are getting the message across early that words hurt and the kids are paying attention.
Counselors are also teaching kids anger management, using puppets.
"It's a turtle trick. When someone's bullying you, you go over to the peace path and there's this little turtle and he bends in his shell like this, and then you do it, and you count to 10, and most of the time, it gets your anger from being bullied," sauid Camden Schlueter, a student.
In Ladue, administrators have given teachers and students a took to report bullyig.
"Students and staff can use forms to fill out to go directly to counselors and administrators," said Maggie Travers, a Ladue School District psychologist. "We have some policies in places that address these issues when they come up."
In South Roxana, Illinios, the approach is pro-active.
"The thing we try to do most is to promote positive behavior," said Principal Nate Porter.
Even with these tools, there are conflicts, something Mesnier school teaches young kids to resolve.
"We bring them itno the office where we have a peace place to talk to the kids," explained Guidance Counselor Janet Winchester. "If they're comfortable with it, then we have the kids work it out and we have a littel conflict mediation."
"It's called rock, paper, scissors," said Abbey Dallman, a student. "And like if you're fighting over a swing, you can do rock, paper, scissors, to see who gets the swing.
What teachers and administrators have learned is that early intervention tools work. They said teaching good behaviour in class was constructive than reactionary discipline. They believe the number one way to identify conflicts is by students speaking up and reporting problems.

Professors: Batsell, Boatwright, Érdi, Gregg (Chair), Hostetter, Tan
Psychology, broadly defined, is the study of animal and human behavior as well as human experience. The discipline involves the use of scientific methods in the discovery of facts and confirmation of theory as well as applications to problems. The major, therefore, includes a focus on the understanding and use of research skills and techniques. Psychology is a diverse field with important connections to biology, education, philosophy, and sociology. Increasingly, psychologists may be found in business, industry, education, government, and medicine, as well as in the more traditional areas of research and mental health.
Given its diversity and connections to other disciplines, psychology is a reasonable choice of major for students who seek a broad liberal arts undergraduate education. Psychology is also a practical major for those who seek careers immediately after graduation in fields where interacting with other people is primary—management, criminal justice, or human services, for example. Students interested in careers in such applied fields, however, may find the human development and social relations (HDSR) major a better choice.
Psychology majors may choose to pursue advanced degrees in three general directions: one, as scientists, leading to careers in higher education or research settings; two, as practitioners, leading to roles as clinicians, school psychologists, industrial psychologists, and health psychologists; and three, as professionals in other fields such as law, medicine, and business administration.

History professor examines state and territorial policies that affected early American Indian citizenship
Deborah Rosen, professor and head of history, has taken an in-depth look at early American Indian policy-making in her most recent book, American Indians and State Law: Sovereignty, Race and Citizenship, 1790 – 1880 (University of Nebraska, December 2007). The publication examines the role that state and territorial governments played in extending jurisdiction over Indians as well as defining borders and the meaning of citizenship.
“Belying the common assumption that Indian policy and regulation in the United States were exclusively within the federal government’s domain, the book reveals how states and territories extended their legislative and judicial authority over American Indians between the early national period and the Reconstruction era,” explains Rosen. “In this book, I detail how state and territorial governments regulated American Indians and brought them into local criminal courts, as well as how Indians contested states’ actions and asserted tribal sovereignty.”
Several students assisted Rosen with her publication as EXCEL scholars. These students were Robert Alessi ’00, Tiffany Blakey ’01, Phillip Dudley ’04, Andrea Kotrosits ’03, and Michael Sparrow ’04.
The students handled a plethora of primary source documents that were foundational to Rosen’s research, including judicial opinions, trial records, statutes, legislative hearings, constitutional convention debates, newspapers, speeches, letters, and official reports.
The finished book is a “discussion of nationwide patterns complemented by case studies focusing on New York, Georgia, New Mexico, Michigan, Minnesota, Louisiana, and Massachusetts that demonstrate the decentralized nature of much of early American Indian policy,” according to Rosen.
In addition to its cornerstone use of primary sources and divergent conclusion, Rosen’s book is the first to present a broad study of state and territorial Indian policies, laws, and judicial decisions in early United States history.
- Exceptional Faculty
- EXCEL/Undergraduate Research

The Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra, or Movement of the
Landless Rural Workers (the MST), was formally created at the Primeiro Encontro
de Trabalhadores Sem Terra [First Meeting of Landless Workers], which took
place from January 21-24, 1984, in Cascavel, in the State of Paraná,
in the south of Brazil. Today, the MST is organized in 22 states and pursues
the same objectives defined at this 1984 Meeting and ratified at the First
National Conference at Curitiba, Paraná, in 1985: to fight for land,
for agrarian reform, and for the building of a just society, without exploiters
and exploited. Since its creation, the MST has included in its political agenda
the fight for schools and the discussion on what kind of school should be a
part of the life of the Sem Terra family.
This article discusses the pedagogical lessons that we can learn from the historical
experience of the MST. Before introducing some of these, however, it is important
to situate the context that allows us to think of a social movement of farm
workers as a place that may have lessons to offer on the processes of human
The MST came into its seventeenth year of existence reflecting deeply on two
of the great tasks that were defined throughout its history: first, to help
put an end to the "mortal sin" of the latifundium, decentralizing the
lands of this immense country, Brazil, and making them socially productive;
and second, to help humanize people, to develop human beings with dignity, identity,
and a project for the future. This second task, perhaps the one that the MST
has accomplished best since its undertaking, is what causes us to think more
directly of the educational dimension of the Movement.
The educational work of the MST has three main dimensions: first, the recovery
of the dignity of thousands of families who once again have roots and purpose.
The poor in everything have become citizens: people with rights, people who
work, study, produce, are a part of their communities, and who, in their daily
challenges, set a new agenda of discussion for this country. The second dimension
is the building of a collective identity, one which goes beyond each person,
family, and settlement. The identity of the Sem Terra [Landless],
and the capital letters without a hyphen, like a proper name that identifies
those who are no longer individuals who lack something have no land (land-less)
but are individuals with a choice that of fighting for more social justice and
dignity for all. This places each member of Sem Terra, through his/her
participation in the MST, in a movement that is related to the re-encounter
of humanity with itself. The third dimension is building the educational project
of different generations of the Sem Terra family, one that combines schooling
with broader concerns of human development and the training of militants.
Viewing the history of the MST in this perspective, we encounter some pedagogical
lessons, or how the proponents of a social struggle and a collectivity in movement
deal with, and are concerned with, education. These lessons can help us reflect
on each of our own educational practices, including those that we undertake
in the schools. Reflecting on these lessons, we may begin to understand something
even more profound: the MST has a pedagogy, that is, it has a praxis
(combined theory and practice) of how people are educated, of how human beings
develop. The Pedagogy of the Sem Terra Movement is the way through which
the Movement has historically developed the social individual of the name Sem
Terra, and has daily educated the people who are part of it. And the main
educational principle of this pedagogy is the movement itself, a movement
that unites diverse pedagogies, and in a special way unites the pedagogy
of social struggle with the pedagogy of the land and the pedagogy
of history, each one helping to make an imprint on our identity, mística,
project. Sem Terra is the name of one who fights for the people who have
roots in the land the land that is won, tilled, cared for and in the movement
This is the main discussion we have today in the MST with our educators: how
to make of the Pedagogy of the Movement a reference for our practice and our
thought. To be an educator in the MST is to succeed in understanding the educational
dimension of the Movementís actions, making them a mirror for its educational
practices. It is a reference viewpoint to aid in discerning the limits and challenges
of these practices. A mirror also educates our viewpoint to see beyond the
MST, beyond the Sem Terra. The Pedagogy of the Movement takes shape
in a dialogue with other educators, other students, and other pedagogical movements.
It was precisely in the interaction with people and works concerned with human
development that we managed to think about the MST as a pedagogical subject.
From this new synthesis, we continue our dialogue with theories and practices
of human development, along with specific thinking on the educational environment
of our schools.
From this dialogue with the Movementís practices and the thinking on human
development throughout the history of humanity, an initial result regards the
very concept of education. When we discuss practices of humanizing the field-workers
as a product of education, we are in fact recovering an essential link to the
work in education: to educate is to humanize, to cultivate learning to be a
The MST works all the time at the limit between humanization and dehumanization;
its struggle is that of life or death for thousands of people, who make their
participation in the Movement a tool for re-learning to be human. This is the
day-to-day task of the education of the Sem Terra in each march, each
camp, each settlement And it is this same day-to-day practice that shows that
the task is necessary and possible; that the adultsí and the agedís nearly lost
humanity can be recovered through learning, and that it is even more necessary
and possible to help in this learning from childhood.
From this conception of education, there are pedagogical lessons we have managed
to derive in this reflective counterpoint among the daily life of the MST, the
diverse theories and practices on human development, and the concerns with how
to educate the Sem Terra. These are lessons that also help us think and
rethink the curriculum and the educational environment of our schools.
1. People are the greatest value produced and cultivated by the MST
The Movement is the way that people collectively produce the Sem
Terra identity and carry out the struggle for agrarian reform that is the
root and strength of this identity. At times of the most acute social conflict,
such as those we live through today, this is even more visible: it is on the
people, on each one of them, that resistance depends, as well as the determination
of the proposals, the conduct that persists as an image for society, the continuity
in the face of the fiercest conflicts, the identity. The MST has succeeded in
arriving at its seventeenth year because it has learned to value every person
who is a part of its organization, and because it has defined human development
as one of its main priorities.
As educators, we need to be clear about what is in question every time we meet
with those we are educating: we are facing human beings, who deserve our respect
and dedication as human beings, and as members of an organization that fights
for dignity. Our work in a school where the Sem Terra study, for example,
needs to be thought of in the perspective of a great educational effort, which
makes us responsible, interested, and committed.
We need to reflect always on some basic questions: what human being are we
helping to develop through our practice? Is there coherence with the humanity
that the MST struggle has been producing and planning for throughout its history?
And those we educate: what human being do they see when they look at themselves
and their settlement companions? Have our educational practices helped them
to value themselves as persons and take on the collective identity they help
2. People are educated by learning to be
One of the things that often calls attention to the MSTís actions is the self-respect
of the people who take part in it. This self-respect, or feeling of dignity,
is produced to the extent that these people learn to be Sem Terra
and to be proud of that name. And on taking on this social, collective identity
we are Sem Terra, we are of the MST these people gradually discover dimensions
of their personal and collective identity, as well: Iím a woman, Iím black,
Iím a rural worker, Iím young, Iím an educator They are new individuals who
are formed and begin to demand their place in the world, in history; they know
they can and ought to fight for the right to be human wherever they are, with
or against whomever they are.
This returns us to the notion that this is an essential human task of learning:
to look in the mirror of what we are and want to be, to take on personal and
collective identities, to be proud of them, at the same time we are challenged
with the movement of our permanent self-construction. To educate is to help
build and strengthen identities, to draw faces, to form subjects. And this has
everything to do with values, way of life, memory, culture.
3. People are educated in the actions they perform and the works they produce
The MST forms the Sem Terra by putting them in a movement, which
means in permanent action, action with the dynamic of a social struggle: occupations,
encampments, marches, demonstrations of solidarity, the building of a new kind
of life in the settlements, schools, activities of development. It is through
such action that they learn that nothing is impossible to change, not even people,
their propensities, their positions, their ways of life, their values.
People are educated in action because it is the movement of action that molds
the way to becoming human. Actions produce and are produced through social relations:
that is, they set in motion another fundamental pedagogical element, which is
the interaction between people, how they behave among each other, which is measured
by the tools inherited from those who have produced other tools before (culture).
In these relations, people show who they are, and at the same time they construct
and revise their identities, their way of being.
We are speaking of any action, or of acting for actingís sake, without any
intentionality. We are speaking of action that produces works (material or not)
that become the mirror in which people can see what they are or even want to
be; and we are speaking mainly of work and the material production of our existence.
There is no true education without action, without work, and without collective
works. And, as the children remind us, there is also no education without games
and play, which can also be thought of as collective action producing works.
4. People are educated by producing and reproducing culture
The actions of the Sem Terra are loaded with cultural meanings that
they learn to produce and express. In an occupation, on a march, or in the organization
of a settlement, there appears not only what these families of workers are today,
or at this particular moment. Every action brings together with it the way of
being human that these people bear, the developing weight of the objective
circumstances of their whole previous existence and the type of education they
have received or lived. At the same time, their collective action is also usually
the negation of certain traditions that have marked their lives up to now, and
the projection of values they learn or re-learn in the pedagogical process of
the Movement. The MSTís expressions, symbols, art, way of struggle, embody a
cultural moment that neither begins nor ends at the moment of action. Each landless
person who enters the MST also enters a world already productive of symbols,
expressions, human examples, values, which, with each action, s/he learns to
signify and resignify.
One of the great pedagogical challenges of the MST with its social base has
been precisely to help people make a new cultural synthesis, one that joins
their past, present, and future in a new, rooted collective and personal identity.
To live as if one struggles, to struggle as if one lives This is a coherent
position that has been seen as necessary to the Movementís aims of social transformation,
as well as in its permanent conflicts and challenges. Memory, mística,
discussion of values, criticism and self-criticism, the study of history, these
are some cultural tools that the Movement has been using in this construction.
We can reflect then that to educate is to also to share meanings and tools
of culture (Jerome Brunerís expression, in Arroyo 2000). It is to help people
in the learning of signfying and resignifying their actions, in
such a way that they may transform them into values, behavior, convictions,
customs, expressions, symbols, art, that is, into a way of life chosen
and reflected by the collectivity of which they form a part. This means, among
other things, that to educate people is help to cultivate their memory; it is
to become acquainted and reacquainted with their symbols, expressions, words;
it is to situate them in a wider cultural and historical universe; it is to
work with different languages, organize different moments and modes so that
people may think about their practices, their roots, their plans, their lives
5. People are educated by living values
Values are a fundamental dimension of culture; they are the principles of life,
that for which we consider it worth living. Values are what move our
practices, our life, our being human. Values are what produce in people the
need to live for the sake of freedom and justice. Values are what move the striving
of the Sem Terra to make their settlements utopian communities, consistent
with the struggle that won them over.
The MST has been very concerned with the cultivation of values, because it
knows that it is the values, translated into culture, that it will leave as
a heritage to its descendants and the new generations of those who fight for
the people. And values only exist through people, their experiences, positions,
convictions. And they are not born with each one: they are learned, cultivated
through the collective processes of development, of education.
For the MST, this has not been an easy battle: to recover and cultivate human
values like solidarity, loyalty, the spirit of sacrifice for the collective
well-being, companionship, seriousness, discipline, indignation in the face
of injustices, the valuing of the Sem Terra identity, humility - in a
society that day by day degenerates with the counter-values of individualism,
consumerism, social apathy, lack of commitment to life, the exclusion of those
who take part in social struggles But it is only by taking on the job of educating
and re-educating people in its values that the MST can realize the project of
6. People are educated by learning how to solve problems
In the actions of a social struggle knowledge is acquired and produced,
and it is a very important dimension of the strategy for the humanization of
the people. But one of the pedagogical lessons we have gleaned from the day-to-day
life of the Movement is that the process of producing knowledge that effectively
aids in the development of the person is that which is connected to the large
and small questions of life. When a Sem Terra needs to know how to calculate
an area in order to measure the land where his agro-villa will be settled, or
when he needs to study geography to best choose the place for an occupation,
this knowledge will certainly have more human and social density for him. When
a Sem Terra child learns how to measure the materials that she needs
to begin building her playground, or learns to write letters to people she likes,
the same thing occurs. The expression "to know is to solve," from the Cuban
educator José Martí, brings us to an even more radical question:
it suggests to us that there is no true knowledge outside of concrete situations,
or the solution to problems of "real" life. And it really seems to be so, especially
when this question is put into the context of pedagogical processes.
To educate is to socialize knowledge and is also the tool for producing knowledge
that affects peopleís lives in their various dimensions of identity and universality.
To learn in order to solve problems means to understand knowledge as a comprehension
of reality in order to transform it, comprehension of the human condition in
order to make it fuller, which is a very old lesson that the Pedagogy of the
Movement is merely recovering.
7. People are educated by learning from the past to plan for the future
It was in this way that the Movement made itself as it is: learning from those
who had struggled before, cultivating the memory of their own path. History
is made in this way: planning for the future beginning with the lessons of the
past cultivated in the present. ĎThe land holds the rootsí, says one of the
MSTís songs. Education also must hold the roots, helping to cultivate
the memory of the people and in the development of historical consciousness.
Educators have a very specific task for this: their meetings with their learners
can be a privileged time for learning to cultivate the collective memory, and
for the study of a broader history. To know that this can make a difference:
the memory of the debts to the people that were not paid, the wounds that were
not healed, is not erased.
It is necessary to educate every Sem Terra family so that their rural
roots, their culture, and how these roots take part in the formation of the
Brazilian people, are not forgotten, so that all the Sem Terra may learn
how they came to the condition of being rural landless workers, and how they
have many other brothers all over the world in a similar condition, who are
also carrying on a struggle for the land and for agrarian reform as we are.
And as educators we also need to learn from this memory and its cultivation,
not to remain imprisoned in the past, but, on the contrary, to set it in motion
and plan for the future what is best for everyone.
8. People are educated in collectivities
The MST is a collectivity. And in it the Sem Terra learn that
the collective is the great subject of the struggle for land as well as its
great educator. Nobody gets his/her land by him/herself; the occupations, the
encampments, the settlements are collective works. The force of each person
is in his roots, which is his part in a collectivity with a memory and project
for the future. It is through taking part in the collective and its works that
people are educated not alone, but in relation to others which potentializes
their own singular, unique person.
People do not learn to be human by themselves. Without the bonds of their participation
in collectives they cannot go forward to a fully human condition. Uprooted people
are dehumanized people, who do not recognize themselves in any past and have
no project for the future. To educate is to help root people in strong collectives;
it is to potentialize social, human harmony in the construction of identities,
values, knowledge, feelings. An educational environment is fundamentally an
educational collective, moved and planned by teachers, but shared by all of
its members. In a true collective, all are at the same time educators and educated,
because all are a part of the process of learning and re-learning to be human.
9. The educator educates by conduct
The educator educates by conduct much more than by words. The strength of the
MST is not in its speeches, but in its actions and in the positions of the Sem
Terra who make them happen. It is the practices and the conduct of the collective
that educates the people who take part in the Movement or live with it.
It is for this reason that in the MST we have as educational references people
like Paulo Freire and Che Guevara. They were not educators only for what they
said or wrote, but through the testimony of the consistency between what they
thought, said, and effectively did and were, as persons and as militants in
the causes of the people.
To be an educator is, therefore, a way of being, a way of being with the people
that is a living message of values, convictions, feelings, of a conscience that
moves us and that we claim to defend in our organization. It is to have a complete
committment, which is not easy. Only a collective can help us in the process
of criticism and self-criticism, in the calls and in the affections that show
us when we are vacillating and also show us the right path so that we may return
Individuals are not only formed in school. There are other experiences that
produce even stronger learning. The Pedagogy of the Movement is not contained
by the school, because neither the Movement nor human development is contained
by it. But the school is a part of the Movement and its pedagogy, so much so
that historically the MST has tenaciously fought so that all the Sem Terra
may have access to schools. The school that is a part of the Pedagogy of the
Movement is the one that returns to its original task: taking part in human
To think of the school as a workshop of human development means to think
of it as a place where the educational process or the process of human development
occurs in an intentionally planned way, conducted and thought about for this
purpose, a process that is guided by a project for society and the human being,
and is sustained by the presence of people with specific knowledge for the work
of education, by the sincere co-operation of everyone who is there to learn
and to teach, and by the permanent link with other social practices that have
begun and continue this work.
The expression also helps us to rethink the pedagogical logic, or the pedagogical
method of the school. We claim that the school is not only a place for teaching,
and that a method of education is not the same as a method of teaching. It is
necessary to plan various pedagogical strategies in view of the different kinds
of learning that make up the complex process of human development.
In a school conceived as a workshop of human development, educators are architects,
organizers, and stimulators of the educational environment. This demands
great sensitivity and mastery of the arts of pedagogy to form the schools from
a clear perception of how the educational process is developing in each student
and in the collectivity as a whole; to perceive the contradictions and not be
overwhelmed by them, but to work with them pedagogically; to be aware of what
dimensions need to be emphasized at one moment or another, what type of actions
need to be performed and with what contents, what relations need to be worked
on and at what time.
It is a very important kind of learning: one needs to be humble enough to place
oneself always in the situation of an apprentice of the process, as apprentices
that we all are, of this complex art of building humanity, of which the MST
also has a part, albeit but a small one.
Arroyo, M. G. Ofício de mestre. Petrópolis: Vozes, 2000.
Caldart, R. S. Pedagogia do Movimento Sem Terra. Petrópolis:
Caldart, R. S. A pedagogia da luta pela terra: o movimento social como princípio
educativo, trabalho solicitado pela 23a Reunião Anual da ANPED,
Trabalho Movimentos Sociais e Educação, 2000.
Freire, P. Pedagogia da indignação. São Paulo:
Editora da UNESP, 2000.
Martí, J. Ideário pedagógico. Havana: Imprensa
Nacional de Cuba, 1961.
Stedile, J. P. e Fernandes, B. M. Brava gente: a trajetória do MST
e a luta pela terra no
Brasil. São Paulo: Fundação Perseu Abramo, 1999.

Mineral oils listed as Petrolatum (Petroleum Jelly) or C-18 derivatives are frequently used in personal care products such as lipsticks, lubricants, baby lotions and oils. They commonly contain contaminants that studies have linked to cancer. UCLA studies links "high levels of exposure to mineral oils to increased mortality and incidence of lung cancer, ... melanoma" Source: PubMed.com
Mineral oils are also known to clog pores, forming a barrier preventing skin from eliminating toxins. Repeated use can even set off skin conditions such as acne and dermatitis.
Petroleum Jelly, or Petrolatum, is a semisolid compound derived from hydrocarbon. It can block the skin’s ability to moisturize itself, leading to chapped and dry skin, which are often conditions it is sold to alleviate. While Petrolatum on its own is not too harmful, it is often cheaply produced and the impurities/contaminants often found in Petrolatum are the concern. Frequently, Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons(PAH) are found, which have been linked in studies to breast cancer.
Petrolatum has been banned by the EU from use in cosmetics unless the source can be proven and the product shown to be pure. It is listed as a possible human carcinogen.
Only use plant oils, never petroleum based oils.

5. Risky behavior in youth decreases: Results of the 2011 New Mexico Youth Risk and Resiliency Survey showed a significant decrease in the rates of the prevalence of suicide attempts, cigarette smoking and binge drinking among the state's public high school students. The YRRS is conducted in New Mexico public high schools and middle schools in the fall semester of odd numbered years. The 2011 YRRS surveyed 16,635 New Mexico high school students. According to the survey, suicide attempts were reported by 8.6 percent of high school students, down 40.7 percent from a high of 14.5 percent in 2003. The percentage of high school students who were current smokers declined from a high of 30.2 percent in 2003 to 19.9 percent in 2011. Binge drinking decreased from a rate of 35.4 percent in 2003 to 22.4 percent in 2011. For more information, including reports by New Mexico counties, go to www.youthrisk.org.
4. New skilled nursing facility opens: The Department of Health held a ribbon-cutting ceremony in July for the new Meadows Home at the New Mexico Behavioral Health Institute in Las Vegas. Meadows Home is a skilled nursing facility that provides care for up to 180 residents of New Mexico. The new building, which is the first of three phases that is being built, replaces buildings that were built in 1948 and 1955. The Meadows Home creates a
3. West Nile resurgence: West Nile Virus was once again in the national and State spotlight due to a resurgence in the number of human cases of the disease nationwide and in New Mexico. In 2012, there were 47 human cases, which included one death in Bernalillo County. In 2011 there were four human cases and in 2010 there were 25 cases. West Nile was first detected in 2003 in New Mexico, with 209 human cases. West Nile Virus prevention tips can be found online at www.nmhealth.org/erd/healthdata/westnile.shtml.
2. Prescription drug overdoses Increase: In May 2012, the Department released data that shows sales of controlled prescription opiate pain relievers increased 131 percent in New Mexico between 2001 and 2010. During the same period, the state's drug overdose death rate increased 61.8 percent. Since 2007, the overdose death rate from prescription drugs has exceeded the death rate from illicit drugs such as heroin and cocaine.
There is help available for people addicted to prescription medications. The Southwest Pathways Clinic at the Las Cruces Public Health Office offers medication assisted treatment for persons with opiate dependency in southern New Mexico and provides intensive outpatient treatment that may be an alternative to narcotic treatment with methadone maintenance therapy. For more information about Southwest Pathways, visit www.healthynm.org.
1. Pertussis outbreak: There have been more than 750 cases of Pertussis in New Mexico this year. This is compared to 277 cases in 2011, 151 cases in 2010 and just 85 cases in 2009. Pertussis is a vaccine-preventable disease that causes fits of coughing that in some people make it hard to breathe. Anyone can get pertussis, but babies who get the disease are at greatest risk of complications, including pneumonia, seizures, brain damage and death. The best prevention from stopping the spread of pertussis is to get vaccinated. The CDC recommends cocooning, which is vaccinating everyone who comes into close contact with an infant, including daycare workers, aunts, uncles and grandparents. Find more pertussis information online at www.nmhealth.org/pertussis.
To read the full top 10 list, visit www.healthynm.org. Happy New Year!
Chris J. Minnick writes for the New Mexico Department of Health. He can be reached at firstname.lastname@example.org.

Session 5Guided Channel-TalkLife Posting
Dogs and cats are great examples of animals whose diversity is the result of artificial selection. The variation that is evident among breeds has been purposefully developed by breeders. In your Channel-TalkLife posting for this session, describe how you could develop a unit on the fundamentals of evolution (e.g., variation, adaptation, natural selection) using these animals. Be sure to discuss how you would tailor the concepts addressed during this session to the grade level you teach.
Breeders for thousands of years have bred dogs for particular purpose. In ancient China the Chow was admired for its loyalty to owner and its ability to withstand harsh temperatures. The poodle swims very well and is very intelligent. The terrier breed is known for its tenacity and for catching rats. In third grade I would ask each student to chose a breed of dog or cat and then research the characteristics of that breed in regard to physical traits. I would then ask the students to share with the class how the breed differs from others and why breeders have selected those qualities. I would then discuss how it is that breeders can purposefully bred dogs that have puppies with those desirable characteristics.
Session 6 Guided Channel-TalkLife Posting
Both the National Science Education Standards and Benchmarks for Scientific Literacy propose standards or goals for understanding big ideas in evolution starting in the elementary grades. Of the ideas addressed in Session 5 (variation, genes, mutation, adaptation, natural selection, artificial selection) and Session 6 species, evolution of new species, relatedness, common ancestry, tree of life), which do you consider appropriate introduce at the grade level you teach? Why? Discuss this with your colleagues in your Channel-TalkLife posting for this session. Be sure to share any experiences you've had.
In third grade appropriate concepts to introduce are: variation adaptation, genes, natural selection, artificial selection, species, evolution of new species, tree of life and common ancestry. I think that if conversations develop within the classroom at an early age that teachers should have the knowledge and background in science to explain these concepts in an age appropriate way. I think that it would be unprofessional to teach the vocabulary only and not provide hands-on activities for younger children to be able to begin making connections with these concepts. I have taught some evolutionary concepts when our classroom conversations went in that direction, but evolution is not part of the third grade curriculum.
Channel-talklife mailing list
Received on Sun Oct 9 20:28:07 2005

On February 1st, the secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (the “Convention”) announced the pledges made by countries under the Copenhagen Accord (the “Accord”). Developed country parties to the Accord pledged greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction targets to be achieved by 2020. Most notably, developing country parties to the Accord also pledged mitigation actions. By the January 31st deadline, pledges had been provided by countries representing approximately 80% of global GHG emissions.
pledges made under the Accord
Adhering to legislation passed in its House of Representatives, the U.S. pledged a 17% reduction from 2005 levels.1 Canada also pledged a 17% reduction from 2005 levels, “to be aligned with the final economy-wide emissions target of the United States in enacted legislation.”2 Like Canada, many parties made pledges contingent on action by others. The European Union, for example, pledged to reduce its emissions 20% below 1990 levels, or by 30% should other parties make comparable commitments.
As an example of a mitigation action pledge of a developing country, China pledged to lower its carbon intensity (per unit GDP) by 40-45% by 2020, to increase to 15% the share of non-fossil fuels used in primary energy consumption, and to increase its forest coverage and forest stock volume.3 In comments following the announcement of the pledges, U.S. Special Envoy for Climate Change, Todd Stern has made it clear that the U.S. expects of developing countries, stronger mitigation actions than those contained in the Accord.4
the 2009 UN climate change conference
The Accord was the outcome of the fifteenth Conference of the Parties (the “Conference”) to the Convention,5 attended by yours truly. In an unprecedented display of the prominence that climate change is gaining on the world stage, the Conference was attended by 115 heads of state and over 40,000 delegates.
The stage that was the Conference was not without its share of theatrics. When the leaders arrived in the final days to find that little progress had been made, the drama moved behind the scenes. In a telling moment, frustrated by negotiating only with Chinese Premier Wen’s aides, U.S. President Obama walked in on a private meeting between Wen and the leaders of Brazil, India, and South Africa.6 It was largely these five major economies that would go on to produce the Accord, which calls for any global temperature increase to be limited to two degrees Celsius.7
However the parties to the Convention’s Kyoto Protocol (the “Protocol”), the first commitment period of which ends in 2012, were unable to agree to its extension. The lack of consensus leaves in suspension the status of the Protocol’s Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and the value of the Certified Emissions Reductions (CERs) generated by thousands of projects thereunder. The International Emissions Trading Association (IETA), which held a parallel conference, nevertheless remains optimistic: “an international injection of increased demand remains a strong possibility over investment timescales but still has to be treated as an upside rather than a given.”8
back on the home front
As mentioned above, Canada’s climate change policy is explicitly tied to that of the United States. 2009 saw in the U.S. the passage in the House of Representatives of the American Clean Energy and Security Act (“Waxman-Markey”). Waxman-Markey calls for a 17% reduction of emissions below 2005 levels by 2020 and provides for the trading of allowances.9 Debate in the U.S. Senate of the similar Kerry-Boxer bill is nominally scheduled for debate this spring, though it may be 2011 before it comes to a floor vote. Tri-partisan senators John Kerry (D), Lindsey Graham (R) and Joe Lieberman (I) have taken it upon themselves to ensure passage of a climate (or “energy independence”) bill.
For many U.S. senators, any climate legislation must be accompanied by developing country emissions reductions and the international verification thereof. As China and others are less keen on international monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV), the Accord features compromise language. Countries will communicate their actions “with provisions for international consultations and analysis under clearly defined guidelines that will ensure national sovereignty is respected.”10 In any case, with more than two thirds of Americans supporting the regulation of GHG emissions,11 the passage of legislation through Congress and, consequently, Canadian federal regulation, may be on the horizon.
International climate change negotiations will occur in a number of fora this year. While the sixteenth Conference of the Parties will occur in December in Cancun, one might now wonder how much can be expected of 192-party negotiations. In June, Canada will host the G8 and G20 summits, and it is rumoured that climate change policy may be included on the agenda.12 Finally, it is likely that a second meeting of the Major Economies Forum will occur later this year to discuss climate policy.13

Positive Chronicles - East of eden
by Dr Kailash Vajpeyi
"Man is no longer
to be the measure of all things, the center of the universe. He has been measured
and found to be an undistinguished bit of matter, different in no essential way
from bacteria, stones and trees. His goals and purposes, his egocentric notions
of past, present and future; his faith in his power to predict and through prediction
to control his destiny—all these are called into question, considered irrelevant,
or deemed trivial."
When Leonard B. Meyer yanked man down from the exalted status assigned him by the Judeo-Christian tradition, in his 1963 book, The End of Renaissance?, he triggered off a radical shift in the relationship between man and nature. Today, that understanding goes variously by the name of Gaia or Deep Ecology.
The Gaia hypothesis postulates that Planet Earth is a living organism that adjusts and regulates itself like any other organism and that for 3.5 billion years, microbes, plants and animals have co-evolved with the environment as one globally integrated superorganism. In much the same vein, Deep Ecology believes in the essential ecological equality of all species, man and mouse, elephant and earthworm. In an interconnected, indivisible ecosystem, each part is as crucial as the next.
Here, T.S. Eliot may have been tempted to comment on the return of things to their point of beginning. For interconnection was the fundamental premise of the relationship between all traditional civilizations and nature. Unlike the western equation of conqueror and conquered, traditional people related to nature much as an offspring to a benevolent mother, or a devotee to a deity.
Most eastern religions such as Vedic Hinduism, Jainism and Buddhism, include within nature not only all forms of life but also that which is inanimate and invisible. Vedic texts uphold the doctrine called Madhu Vidya, or interdependence between man and nature. The Vedic worldview is beautifully expressed in that famous injunction, Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam (the world is one family).
In the Vedas, natural elements play a pivotal role. But the interrelationship of creation was always within the context of its relationship with the creator. The Vedic sages believed that everything in this world stems from divine knowledge (the word) which was first revealed to a group of seers, who then passed on this knowledge to successive generations of Vedic seers.
And thus, Saraswati, the Goddess of Divine Speech, holds a special place among Hindu deities.
May the divine speech, Saraswati,
The fountainhead of all faculties (mental and spiritual),
The purifier and bestower of true vision,
The recompenser of worship: Be the source of inspiration and accomplishments
For all our benevolent acts
(Rig Veda 1-3-10)
Thus, speech, or vak, has a preeminent role in the Indian tradition. Water, it is believed was literally produced by vak. In turn, if we accept the theory that the theory that the hydrogen molecule is the basis of all life, water could be said to have created the rest of life.
Of the five basic elements that make up life—earth, space, wind fire and water—the last, in the Vedic view, is the primal element. No wonder there are dozens of Vedic verses in praise of water:
O water source of happiness, we pray,
Please give us vigor so that we may
Contemplate the great delight Hail to you divine, unfathomable
All purifying waters
You are the foundation of all this universe
The consciousness of being composed of the same elements was one more proof of the unity of all creation. The elements, both separately and jointly as life forms, were, at one and the same time, objects of reverence and intimately related to us.
We hardly realize that there are cosmic forces which are working in cyclical patterns, and that the most fundamental pattern which governs our life is the movement of he earth on its axis. One shudders to think what would happen to life as we know it if the earth stopped spinning on its axis or the sun failed to rise in the morning.
We are creatures of the planet but the earth is not a geographical entity, it is us. The earth is not simply dust but a reservoir of all energy. It has given birth to four types of creatures: swedaj, udbhij, andaj and pindaj (aquarian, flora and fauna, avian and mammalian).
To the Vedic seers, the idea of subjugating or exploiting the earth was incomprehensible. To them it was an object of worship and not of exploitation. Its conquest was tantamount to dissecting a mother's body to study her heartbeat or chopping her breasts to isolate the gland producing milk. But times have changed. Today, man has no qualms about expropriating the earth's wealth for his own benefit. This has resulted in the creation of a new fifth species, the yantraj—the technetronic being.
According to Daniel J. Boorstin, the author of Cleopatra's Nose: "When the machine kingdom arrived on the scene, it entirely changed the fixedness of the idea of change. A natural species reacts to its environment and learns to adapt to it. But the technetronic species creates its own environment."
For instance, media technology tends to create what can be termed asdiplopia or double image, where it is hard to distinguish reality from illusion. Television, for example, has the capacity to convert an event into virtual reality, what is there is also here at the same time or what is here can also be there if it has been filmed. For the vedic man, the earth was the bestower of blessings, she was the protector of life. All descriptions of Ramrajya, (the reign of Lord Rama, the hero of the Indian epic Ramayana) portrayed the earth as abundant and giving.
The Mahabharata eulogized Yudhisthira's reign thus: "Earth yielded abundant crops and all precious things. She had become the provider of all goodness. Like kamdhenu, the celestial cow, the earth offered thousands of luxuries in a continuous stream."
In Bhumi Sukta we come across verses such as:
O purifying Earth, I you invoke
O, patient Earth by sacred word
Enhanced bearer of nourishment and strength of food and butter,
O, Earth we would approach you with due praise
Influenced by this holistic vision, the Indian way of life was integral, its purpose the well-being of creation. Even in the matter of eating, our ancestors emphasized the importance of feeding others before themselves. A householder could eat only after propitiating the ancestors, the devas representing different aspects of nature, the bhutas representing all created beings, guests, members of the household and servants. The practice of agriculture was deeply influenced by this sacred vision of interconnection.
According to the activist Vandana Shiva's book, The Seedkeeper, new seeds were first worshipped before being consumed. New crop was worshipped before being consumed. For the farmer, field is the mother: worshipping the field is a sign of gratitude towards the earth, who as mother, feeds the millions of life forms who are her children.
"In the place of chemical manures and pesticides, the traditional farmer used nature's own checks and balances to nurture fertility and keep pests at bay. A typical rice field supported and in some places continues to do so 800 species of "friendly insects"—spiders, wasps, ants and pathogens that controlled 95 per cent of insect pests.
These practices are still a living presence among India's tribal societies, for instance, the Warlis, a community near Mumbai, worship nature as Hirva (green) and consider all produce to be gifts of Hirva, rather the fruits of their own labor. Conservation of plants and animals was an innate aspect of their culture, illustrated in the concept of the sacred grooves: mangroves, marshlands and other tracts of land supposedly inhabited by spirits, where killing of plants and animals is taboo.
The Bishnois of Rajasthan, too, will rather die than let a single tree be felled. The concept of coexistence took many forms. Before felling a tree to construct a temple, the carpenter traditionally sought the permission of the tree. And in Emperor Asoka's time, veterinary hospitals were state institutions.
Among the five vital elements which sustain life on earth, the wind in the Rig Veda is called vata. Though the wind is connected with the primordial waters, its origin is not known.
Vedas also address it as the spirit:
May the wind breathe upon us
Prolong our lifespan
And fill our hearts with comfort
Responding to the current environmental crisis, Susan Griffin in her book Women & Nature writes: "We live as if nature is only need to provide extras: paper, recreation, specialty foods, a job to provide money."
Unlimited desire and man's greed has devastated this planet to such an extent that by the time you finish reading this article, at least 10 species of birds would be extinct forever. In contrast, personal fulfillment in Buddhism is sought through independence.
Here the self is temporary and nonessential rather than the center of the universe. Writes Kerry Brown, co-author of Buddhism and Ecology, about the Buddhist philosophy: "Where infinite spiritual development is possible within a physical existence that is understood and accepted as infinite."
Buddha attained enlightenment under a banyan tree, J. Krishnamurti had the same kind of realization under a pepper vine. No wonder the author of Bhamini Vilas called the tree Guru.
"O tree! You bear fruits, leaves and flowers and protect people from the scorching sun. Whoever come to you in scorching heat, you take away their suffering and give them coolness. This way you surrender yourself for others. That is why you are a Guru of all kind people."
Anekantavada, the Jain concept that professes multiple views of reality, goes even deeper. Its verdict on the unmindful endeavors of mankind would be damning. The bacterial organism, as understood in modern science, can be compared with what is called nigodiya life in Jainism. And ahimsa or nonviolence, which is fundamental to Jain philosophy, teaches not harming even the basic forms of life. Jainism and other Indian religions advocate that compassion must be the foundation for any truly civilized community.
Lawrence Joseph, the author of Gaia, has obviously been deeply influenced by all systems of Indian philosophy which adhere to the universal law of interdependence. Lynn Margulis, co-author of the Gaia theory along with James Lovelock, believes strongly that the biological microcosm provides a key controlling influence in the global environment and argues that the role of these tiny organisms has been underestimated because they are invisible. With the convergence of the most recent scientific understanding and the most recent ancient wisdom, there is hope yet for the survival of the earth and, in turn, life on it.
There can be no better sign of it than NASA circulating, all over the USA, a photograph of the earth with the caption: Love your mother.
|HOME | SUBSCRIBE | WALLPAPERS | ADVERTISING | POLICY | PRACTITIONERS | WRITERS | PEOPLE | ABOUT | CONTACT|

Common streaming audio formats and players
Uncompressed CD-quality WAV and AIFF files are too large to stream over the Internet for playback in real time. Instead, lighter-weight compressed formats such as MP3 and RealAudio are employed for streaming network audio. These formats use what are called "lossy" compression schemes, reducing file sizes by eliminating certain inaudible data from the original files without too significantly degrading playback sound quality. MP3 and RealAudio are excellent streaming formats, achieving performance factors great enough to allow real-time encoding/decoding over current network bandwidth conditions while delivering satisfying audio quality.
MP3 and RealAudio are not the only players in the network streaming audio arena. We'll also look at Macromedia's Flash and the Ogg Vorbis project from the Xiphophorus group. Since RealAudio's Internet history begins the earliest, we'll start with RealAudio.
In 1995, Progressive Networks (now RealNetworks) introduced RealAudio, the Internet's first widely-deployed streaming audio format. The RealAudio player (RealPlayer) was freely distributed to users who at that time were typically connected to the Internet via low-bandwidth modems; thus, the player supported connection rates as low as 14.4 Kbps, which delivered audio quality comparable to the sound of a decent AM radio. Faster connections such as ISDN accordingly improved reception speed and sound quality.
By giving away basic versions of RealPlayer and the RealProducer content-production utility, Progressive Networks seeded the market for their commercial product line and sparked an explosion in network multimedia. Today you can find an astonishing number and variety of RealAudio-enabled sites. As a curious example, I searched Google for "realaudio history", hoping to find some background material on the format; instead, I found thousands of sites dedicated to various historical topics, all of which included audio presentations requiring RealPlayer.
RealPlayer: RealAudio in X
Happily, RealPlayer is available for Linux, and you can retrieve it for free as either an RPM or tarball package from the Real.com downloads page. Installation is fairly straightforward, but there are a few snags to report. Close your web browser before installing the software, then become the root user and run the installation package. The RPM file needs to be renamed:
mv rp8_linux20_libc6_i386_cs1_rpm rp8.linux20.libc6.i386.cs1.rpm
before installing it (as root) with this command:
rpm -i rp8.linux20.libc6.i386.cs1.rpm
The tarball must have its permissions set (as root again):
chmod u+x rp8_linux20_libc6_i386_cs1.bin
Now you can run the installation package:
The installation procedure will automatically set up RealPlayer as a helper application in Netscape, but be forewarned: It will also overwrite any custom settings you have for audio formats such as WAV, AIFF, and AU, so you may want to back up your Netscape preferences before installing RealPlayer. Also, the installation will not automatically update the RealAudio plug-in. Close Netscape, copy the
rpnp.so file from your new
$HOME/RealPlayer directory to
$HOME/.netscape/plugins, fire up Netscape again, and your RealAudio plug-in should now be enabled. Check the Help/About Plugins menu item in Netscape for a status report.
TRPlayer: RealAudio for the console
At least three RealAudio players are available for the Linux console. They all depend upon an existing installation of RealPlayer and act as wrappers for RealPlayer, making its functions available to console applications. The RAP and RaWrapper players require support for the frame-buffer device; I wanted to avoid the need for any special graphics support (such as SVGA, frame-buffer, or
ncurses) in my console RealAudio player, so I chose Matthew Campbell's TRPlayer.
TRPlayer is available as a binary in RPM and DEB packages, but I chose to build the latest beta version (2.0.b2) from the source tarball. TRPlayer's only unique requirement is the slang library and header. Fortunately, slang is found on most mainstream Linux distributions, and a straightforward
./configure; make should have your player ready to rock. However, due to the filesystem vagaries of Linux distributions your build may fail with this message:
main.cc:17: slang.h: No such file or directory make: *** [main.o] Error 1
If so, change this line in
to this line:
When the build is complete, become root (
su root), run
make install, and you will have a new command-line RealAudio player. You can call it from the prompt at the console or in
xterm, invoking it with an address linking the player to the RealAudio stream:
You now have streaming RealAudio at the Linux console. Cool...
RealNetworks deserves praise for maintaining and steadily improving a freely available RealPlayer for Linux, particularly since there's no other way to enjoy all those RealAudio-empowered sites. Harder-core users and developers might be dismayed to learn that Real's software is available only in binary format and that source code is not freely available. Nevertheless, there's only one place to go for RealPlayer, so if you want it, there you go.
Now let's look at that other major streaming audio format, the notorious MP3.

Gene fault linked to stroke risk
A “single genetic mutation can double your risk of stroke”, the Daily Mail has reported. The newspaper added that scientists hope the discovery could lead to tailored treatments for the condition.
The news is based on research which looked for genetic variations that were more common in people who had had an ischaemic stroke than in people who had not had one. Ischaemic strokes occur when the blood flow to a part of the brain is blocked. They account for 80% of stroke cases. By testing the DNA of several thousand participants, the researchers identified a new genetic variant that was associated with increased risk of a type of ischaemic stroke called a “large vessel stroke”. In large vessel strokes, one or more of the arteries supplying blood to the brain become blocked. People can carry up to two copies of the variant, and the study’s authors estimated that each copy of the variant a person carried was associated with about a 42% increase in the odds of a large vessel stroke. However, it is not yet known whether this genetic variant raises the risk of a stroke, or if it is found near to another variant that is responsible for the increased risk.
This well-designed study has identified a new association between a genetic variation and strokes. However, the study cannot confirm whether the variation itself causes the increased risk of a stroke. This key issue will need to be clarified before these findings can contribute to the development of the new treatments that many newspapers optimistically predicted.
Where did the story come from?
The study was carried out by researchers from the University of Oxford, St George’s, University of London, and a number of other UK and international universities and research institutes. It was funded by The Wellcome Trust. The study was published in the peer-reviewed scientific journal Nature Genetics.
This study was covered by a number of newspapers. In general, the coverage of the research was good, although many news stories focused on its potential to lead to the development of screening tests and new treatments. However, there is no guarantee that this research will lead to such advances. If it does, they are likely to be some way off.
What kind of research was this?
This case-control study aimed to identify genetic factors that are associated with an increased risk of ischaemic strokes. Ischaemic strokes occur when there is a blockage of blood flow to part of the brain. This can deprive brain cells of vital oxygen and nutrients. Around 80% of strokes are ischaemic. The remainder are haemorrhagic strokes, caused by a blood vessel rupturing in or around the brain.
To find genetic variants associated with strokes, the researchers read the DNA sequences of a group of patients who had had an ischaemic stroke. They compared them to the sequences of a group of healthy people. Their theory was that genetic variations that were more common among the stroke group could potentially be linked to stroke risk. To verify whether the variants they initially identified in these groups were associated with strokes, the researchers tested if the same pattern was seen when another group of stroke patients were compared with another group of healthy individuals (controls). This is an accepted method that is used when performing genetic studies of this type.
Although this was a well-designed study, genetic studies like this one can only show that a particular genetic variant is associated with a disease. Further experiments are required to see if the variants identified have a role in causing strokes, or if they lie close to other genetic variants that have this effect. What these variants do still needs to be identified, so media claims that this research could lead to potential new treatments seem premature.
It is also important to remember that genetic, medical and lifestyle factors are likely to contribute to a person’s risk of a stroke. It should not be assumed that a person’s genetics mean that they will definitely have a stroke. Equally, people without high-risk genetics may still be at risk of a stroke risk because of lifestyle factors, such as smoking.
What did the research involve?
In the first phase of the study, researchers recruited 3,548 individuals who had had an ischaemic stroke (the cases) and 5,972 healthy individuals (the controls). The researchers looked for genetic variants that were more common in the stroke group. In a second phase, the researchers confirmed their findings in a new group of 5,859 cases and 6,281 controls. The new genetic variation they identified was then re-confirmed in a further 735 cases and 28,583 controls.
What were the basic results?
The researchers identified genetic variants at three locations that have been associated with different subtypes of ischaemic stroke in previous studies (near the genes PITX2 and ZFHX3, and on the short arm of chromosome 9). In addition, they identified a genetic variant at a new position within the HDAC9 gene, which was associated with a subtype of ischaemic stroke called large vessel stroke. In large vessel strokes, one or more of the large arteries supplying blood to the brain become blocked. This variant in HDAC9 occurs on about 10% of chromosomes in people in the UK. Humans have two copies of each chromosome, and therefore we can carry up to two copies of this variant (one on each chromosome). The researchers calculated that each copy of the variant that a person possessed was associated with a 42% increase in the odds of having a large vessel stroke (odds ratio 1.42, 95% confidence interval 1.28 to 1.57 for each copy).
How did the researchers interpret the results?
The researchers concluded that they have “identified a new association with the HDAC9 gene region in large vessel stroke”. They also stated that “the mechanism by which variants in the HDAC9 region increase large vessel stroke risk is not immediately clear.”
In this study, researchers have identified a genetic variant in the HDAC9 gene that is associated with a subtype of ischaemic stroke called a large vessel stroke. Large vessel strokes occur when one or more of the arteries supplying blood to the brain become blocked.
In this type of study, the genetic variants identified as being associated with a condition are not necessarily the cause of the increase in risk. Instead, they may lie near another variant that is responsible for the effect. In order to unlock the role of the HDAC9 gene, researchers will now need to study it and the region surrounding it more closely, both to confirm whether the variation in this gene is responsible for the increase in stroke risk and, if so, how it has this effect.
Genetic, medical and lifestyle factors are likely to contribute to stroke risk. In addition, multiple genetic factors may potentially contribute to the risk. It’s important to note that although having higher-risk genetic variants increases the risk of having a stroke, it does not guarantee that a person will have one. Equally, people who do not have any associated variants can still be at risk of a stroke because of lifestyles factors such as smoking, drinking and their diet.
This well-designed study found an association between a new genetic variant and one type of stroke. As yet, it is not possible to say whether this finding will lead to the development of new treatments for large vessel strokes.
Search for a job
Search for a car
Search for a house
Weather for Lisburn
Saturday 18 May 2013
Temperature: 9 C to 12 C
Wind Speed: 13 mph
Wind direction: North west
Temperature: 8 C to 15 C
Wind Speed: 10 mph
Wind direction: South east

The Story of the Third Reich! In 1919 the German war machine was shattered and broken, laid waste by the extreme conditions of the Treaty of Versailles. Just 20 years later Nazi Germany had the most powerful armed forces in the world.The Story of the Third Reich explores the momentous events of these years. From Hitler's rise to power in the early thirties to fall in 1945.
Tags: The Story of the Third Reich, Third Reich, National Socialism, Nazi, Adolf Hitler, Mein Kempf, Treaty of Versailles, Anti-Semitism, Holocaust, Waffen SS, Gestapo, SD, World at war, Europe, Wehrmacht, Luftwaffe, Power, Communism, Allies, Axis, Potsdam, Nur
Marked as: approved
Views: 5672 | Comments: 0 | Votes: 0 | Favorites: 0 | Shared: 0 | Updates: 0 | Times used in channels: 1
|Liveleak on Facebook|

Like the Republican party, the Democratic party also cracked beneath the weight of the issues at hand. States that favored slavery in the territories walked out of the Democratic convention at Charleston, preventing nominee Stephen Douglas from winning the party endorsement. A reconvened convention eventually nominated Douglas, but kept territory slavery out of the platform altogether.
As a result of disagreements over the issue of slavery, splinter parties formed. The Southern Democratic Party spun off from traditional Democrats to nominate John Breckenridge, an advocate of slavery in the West. Republican breakaways formed the Constitutional Union Party. They nominated John Bell who would not address the issue of slavery at all, but rather spoke of upholding the Constitution.
With four candidates in the race, Lincoln won the 1860 election. But by the time he took office in March of 1861, seven southern states had already seceded from the Union. When the first shot rang out at Fort Sumter, just one month after Lincoln took office, the Civil War began. Lincoln's hopes for peacefully preserving the union were dashed. In 1863, Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation. He also promoted a Constitutional Amendment to permanently abolish slavery. These bold steps marked a shift from Lincoln's more moderate campaign position on slavery issues. They also shifted the focus of the war from preserving the union to freeing the slaves.
Remarkably, the election of 1864 was not suspended during the bloody Civil War. Union soldiers were given absentee ballots or furloughed to permit them to vote. With mounting Union victories, the votes of soldiers and the campaign slogan, "Don't switch horses in mid-stream," Lincoln won the election. Sadly, as this 1864 campaign song strangely foreshadows, Lincoln did not live to see passage of the 13th Amendment that abolished slavery forever. He was assassinated just five days after Ulysses S. Grant celebrated victory over Robert E. Lee at Appomattox.
Lincoln's presidency causes one to wonder:
- Why he changed his position on the issue of abolition during his presidency?
- Whether these changes might affect the way we view his original platform?
- What were Lincoln's priorities when he created his original platform? How did the advent and progress of the war affect these priorities?
- To what extent did Lincoln's original platform represent his personal views? To what extent did it reflect a desire and strategy to win the presidency?
- If YOU were running for president, how would you balance your own opinions with the need to appeal to party and popular opinion?

I get a lot of email in my inbox. Because I have about 10 email accounts, things could get completely out of hand if I didn't set up a few rules. In email parlance, a "rule" or a "filter" is simply a way of sorting your email automatically as it arrives. Most email programs include rules. For example, in Outlook, you choose Tools|Rules and Alerts to access the Rules dialog box. Even Web-based email like GMail includes rules.
The principles are the same, no matter what email program you use. For example, I am notified whenever someone subscribes to one of our email newsletters. Rather than having to click and drag the email into the proper folder, I set up a rule to have my email program do it for me. When I receive an email that contains Logicaltips in the subject line, the email bypasses my inbox and is automatically filed in the Logical Tips folder.
I use GMail to monitor the discussion groups I participate in. Unlike most email clients, GMail doesn't use folders. However, it does use labels, so you can sort your email by applying labels then using a filter (aka rule) to keep your mail reasonably organized. To set up a label, click the Settings link at the top of the page and click the Labels link. Then type a name in the Create a new label box and click the Create button. Now click the Filters link. Click Create a New Filter. Because discussion group postings always come from the same email address, you can type it into the From box. Alternatively, you might filter emails by their subject line. Click Next Step. Now you tell what GMail should do with the email. You can bypass the inbox, apply a label, add a star, or Forward the email to another email address.
For my discussion groups, I click "Skip the inbox" and apply the label I have set up for the group. On the main GMail page in the Labels area, I can see how many emails there are, but they aren't cluttering up my inbox. Then I can read them when I get around to it.

- Coming Soon.
master naturalist for teachers
The Teacher’s Master Naturalist program incorporates best practices for systemic school reform - it requires that the school’s principal initiate the partnership, and that each school send a team of lead teachers who are responsible for implementing their school’s science and math programs. LCI adapted its Master Naturalist curriculum to provide a program that teaches teachers how to use experiential learning most effectively to improve their school’s science and math programs. Participants engage in research and educational experiences designed to empower them to teach from a first person perspective, sharing their personal adventures with their classes.
During workshops, teachers set and check traps for fish, reptiles, and amphibians, conduct flora and fauna surveys, and collect and identify marine invertebrates and other organisms. As teams of teachers graduate from the course they continue to receive support for school-based projects from LCI staff and the local Master Naturalist association. The program began in 2007-2008 with two pilot schools, and has expanded to eight schools during the 2009-2010 school year. Teachers receive Master Naturalist certification and continuing education credit after completing the year-long program.
learning expeditions schools
The goal of the Learning Expeditions Schools program is to use environmental science as a theme to integrate learning about science, social studies, math, and language arts. The program is a partnership between the LowCountry Institute, Clemson University's Youth Learning Institute, and Beaufort County Schools. The interdisciplinary lessons include field trips, virtual field trips using video and PowerPoint programs, and hands-on activities in the classroom. These lessons use science standards to teach students how geography and climate determine plant communities present which, in turn, influence the economy and the history of the region. Math is integrated into all lessons through science and history-based word problems.
Pilot schools for this program are Shell Point Elementary, Shanklin Elementary, and Robert Smalls Middle School. During the 2012-2013 school year, the program will be made available to other district schools that wish to participate.
- Grants: Several schools have been recipients of grants from LCI to create outdoor classrooms and natural areas using native plants to teach students about pollination, plant lifecycles, and native habitats.
- Hands-on programs: LCI staff and volunteers conduct programs at schools to teach students about the plants and animals native to the Port Royal Sound System.
- School field trips: LCI is able to invite a limited number of schools each year to participate in field trips on Spring Island where students learn about habitats and animals of the lowcountry.
click image to see photos of our school programs

By Sue Weishar, Ph.D.
On August 25, 2008, the small town of Laurel, Mississippi was the site of the largest single workplace site raid in U.S. history. Early that morning hundreds of Immigration Control and Enforcement (ICE) agents swooped down on the Howard Industries plant in Laurel, which produces electric transformers, and began rounding up workers. Anyone who appeared to be of Hispanic origin was separated from other workers and escorted outside to a fenced yard. Roads around the sprawling plant were blocked and ICE helicopters hovered overhead. One resident thought there had been a terrorist attack.1 For the 595 immigrant workers that were arrested that day, there might as well have been. By evening of that long, hot summer day, 488 immigrant workers, many in handcuffs, had been transported on dozens of ICE buses to an immigrant detention center in Jena, Louisiana, four hours away—ripped apart from their families and a community they had come to think of as home. Another 107 persons, mostly women, had been deemed “humanitarian” cases2 and were released with electronic monitoring devices attached to their ankles. They were forced to wear these devices day and night for 22 months.
In the midst of such terror, a small Catholic church became the center of solace and assistance. Several Catholic agencies and the Loyola University New Orleans Law Clinic also played key roles in assisting raid victims. This article examines the Church’s response to the raid in Laurel,3 and how a small Catholic community in the middle of a deeply conservative state was able to mitigate some of the harmful effects of the raid on its immigrant members.

Network with other children's program providers and discuss strategies for bringing space science to children on this board. Share successful programming ideas or models to help inspire others!
I have been able to develop a partnership with the Meigs County schools. We will present a weekly afterschool program at each of our county's elementary schools for ten weeks beginning October 5th for 3rd, 4th and 5th grade students. The middle school and high school science clubs will provide student volunteers to help me with the program. The local energy cooperative has donated $1000 to be used for purchasing materials to be used in the program. Several astronomy outreach programs have agreed to send presenters, including a solar astronomy outreach program (www.charliebates.org) from Atlanta. They will be bringing 9 solar telescopes to the school for us on October 12th. We are all excited about starting this in Meigs County. I hope everyone else from the workshop has great success establishing an "Explore" program in their communities.
Meigs County - Decatur Public Library
That sounds like so much fun, Judi! What a great network you've created from the schools, students, outreach programs, and the energy cooperative. Good luck and let us know how it goes!
3 posts • Page 1 of 1
Who is online
Users browsing this forum: No registered users and 1 guest

Boulder trails are common to the interior of Menelaus crater as materials erode from higher topography and roll toward the crater floor. Downhill is to the left, image width is 500 m, LROC NAC M139802338L [NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University].
Most boulder trails are relatively high reflectance, but running through the center of this image is a lower reflectance trail. This trail is smaller than the others, and its features may be influenced by factors such as mass of the boulder, boulder speed as it traveled downhill, and elevation from which the boulder originated. For example, is the boulder trail less distinct than the others because the boulder was smaller? What about the spacing of boulder tracks? The spacing of bounce-marks along boulder trails may say something about boulder mass and boulder speed. But why is this boulder trail low reflectance when all of the surrounding trails are higher reflectance? Perhaps this boulder trail is lower reflectance because the boulder gently bounced as it traveled downhill, and barely disturbed a thin layer of regolith? The contrast certainly appears similar to the astronauts' footprints and paths around the Apollo landing sites. Or, maybe the boulder fell apart during its downhill travel and the trail is simply made up of pieces of the boulder - we just don't know yet.
LROC WAC context of Menelaus crater at the boundary between Mare Serenitatis and the highlands (dotted line). The arrow marks the location of today's featured image at contact between the crater floor and NE crater wall [NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University].
What do you think? Why don't you follow the trail to its source in the full LROC NAC frame and see if you can find any other low reflectance trails.

When you work on introducing a new technology to a population and region, you discover lots of intriguing impediments to that introduction that you’d never have imagined. Yesterday (October 11, 2012) the Maine Fuel Board voted to allow Maine Energy Systems to engage in an “Emerging Technologies” project with them that might lead to elimination of one of those impediments for the pellet central heating industry in the State of Maine.
Maine is unique in its licensure of technicians for “solid fuels.” In Maine a person installing a boiler must have “solid fuel” authority on his license to legally install a “solid fuel” boiler in someone else’s building. (It’s a bit more complicated than that, but let’s avoid the levels of license detail.) The need for this rule apparently arose from three potential hazards associated with “solid fuel” boilers: the possibility for a thermal run-away during a power outage as combustion continues on a load of fuel while circulation fails due to lack of power, high chimney temperatures, and high boiler surface temperatures.
As highly sophisticated automatic pellet boilers made their way into the American market, they were defined in Maine as “solid fuel” appliances because pellets are solid. While that seems innocent and logical enough, the categorization has one substantial flaw and it creates one significant impediment to product growth in the marketplace.
State-of-the-art pellet boilers display none of the attributes that led to the perceived need for “solid fuel” rules in Maine. The rules were devised for cordwood boilers and coal stoker boilers that can hold a significant charge of fuel at any given time. The combustion of that fuel is relatively uncontrolled. Pellet boilers burn a very small quantity of fuel at any given time, and the combustion of that fuel is highly controlled. Combustion stops almost immediately if the power goes out, hence, no excessive heat can be produced during a power outage.
Cordwood boilers and coal stoker boilers can produce very high stack temperatures. The exhaust gas temperatures from state-of-the-art pellet boilers are very much like those of modern oil boilers. In fact these boilers are so efficient, the stack gas temperature is often quite cool, 250F, or so, but it never exceeds 400F. Therefore, high chimney temperatures never occur.
Old cordwood and coal stoker boilers could develop high surface temperatures making installed distance from combustible surfaces important. The surface temperature of these state-of-the-art pellet boilers is the same as the temperature of the room. The heat exchangers are extremely well insulated to achieve the desired efficiencies. So, the worry about proximity of flammable materials due to high boiler surface temperatures is not justified with these boilers.
Because these highly sophisticated boilers are lumped in the same category as cordwood boilers and coal stoker boilers, “solid fuel” license holders must install them in Maine. There are many fewer “solid fuel” license holders than ordinary oil license holders, so scheduling boiler installations in this rapidly growing segment is very challenging in the busy times of the year. Other busy technicians find it hard to justify studying for a test that focuses generally on boilers they’ll never see, so they’re not inclined to prepare for the “solid fuel” test to install pellet boilers as they’re just beginning to make a mark on the marketplace.
The Emerging Technologies Project
On October 11, 2012, the Maine Fuel Board approved a request made by Maine Energy Systems for a year long project intended to confirm the company’s assertion that their boilers, and those similar to them, can be installed by oil boiler license holders who have been suitably trained in the differences between pellet boilers and oil boilers.
This is great news for the pellet industry in Maine as the State’s boiler inspectors will inspect some, or all, of these installations and, thereby, become much more familiar with these sorts of systems. If the project leads to the anticipated conclusion, the request to re-categorize the boilers for licensure requirement purposes should be reasonably received. We have little doubt that the Project will reach successful conclusion as these very same boilers are installed throughout the Northeast by the same technicians who install oil boilers and who have been trained at Maine Energy Systems in fuel handling and burner adjustment.
In the meantime, Maine Energy Systems will be training oil boiler technicians in the installation of their equipment to ensure that all who choose to install the MESys AutoPellet boiler can do it this heating season on a schedule that works for them.
Dutch Dresser is the Managing Director of Maine Energy Systems in Bethel, Maine.

Ulva spp. on freshwater-influenced or unstable upper eulittoral rock
Ecological and functional relationships
The community predominantly consists of algae which cover the rock surface and creates a patchy canopy. In doing so, the algae provides an amenable habitat in an otherwise hostile environment, exploitable on a temporary basis by other species. For instance, Ulva intestinalis provides shelter for the orange harpacticoid copepod, Tigriopus brevicornis, and the chironomid larva of Halocladius fucicola (McAllen, 1999). The copepod and chironomid species utilize the hollow thalli of Ulva intestinalis as a moist refuge from desiccation when rockpools completely dry. Several hundred individuals of Tigriopus brevicornis have been observed in a single thallus of Ulva intestinalis (McAllen, 1999). The occasional grazing gastropods that survive in this biotope no doubt graze Ulva.
Seasonal and longer term change
- During the winter, elevated levels of freshwater runoff would be expected owing to seasonal rainfall. Also, winter storm action may disturb the relatively soft substratum of chalk and firm mud, or boulders may be overturned.
- Seasonal fluctuation in the abundance of Ulva spp. Would therefore be expected with the biotope thriving in winter months. Porphyra also tends to be regarded as a winter seaweed, abundant from late autumn to the succeeding spring, owing to the fact that the blade shaped fronds of the gametophyte develop in early autumn, whilst the microscopic filamentous stages of the spring and summer are less apparent (see recruitment process, below).
Habitat structure and complexity
Habitat complexity in this biotope is relatively limited in comparison to other biotopes. The upper shore substrata, consisting of chalk, firm mud, bedrock or boulders, will probably offer a variety of surfaces for colonization, whilst the patchy covering of ephemeral algae provides a refuge for faunal species and an additional substratum for colonization. However, species diversity in this biotope is poor owing to disturbance and changes in the prevailing environmental factors, e.g. desiccation, salinity and temperature. Only species able to tolerate changes/disturbance or those able to seek refuge will thrive.
The biotope is characterized by primary producers. Rocky shore communities are highly productive and are an important source of food and nutrients for neighbouring terrestrial and marine ecosystems (Hill et al., 1998). Macroalgae exude considerable amounts of dissolved organic carbon which is taken up readily by bacteria and may even be taken up directly by some larger invertebrates. Dissolved organic carbon, algal fragments and microbial film organisms are continually removed by the sea. This may enter the food chain of local, subtidal ecosystems, or be exported further offshore. Rocky shores make a contribution to the food of many marine species through the production of planktonic larvae and propagules which contribute to pelagic food chains.
The life histories of common algae on the shore are generally complex and varied, but follow a basic pattern, whereby there is an alternation of a haploid, gamete-producing phase (gametophyte-producing eggs and sperm) and a diploid spore-producing (sporophyte) phase. All have dispersive phases which are circulated around in the water column before settling on the rock and growing into a germling (Hawkins & Jones, 1992).
Ulva intestinalis is generally considered to be an opportunistic species, with an 'r-type' strategy for survival. The r-strategists have a high growth rate and high reproductive rate. For instance, the thalli of Ulva intestinalis, which arise from spores and zygotes, grow within a few weeks into thalli that reproduce again, and the majority of the cell contents are converted into reproductive cells. The species is also capable of dispersal over a considerable distance. For instance, Amsler & Searles (1980) showed that 'swarmers' of a coastal population of Ulva reached exposed artificial substrata on a submarine plateau 35 km away.
The life cycle of Porphyra involves a heteromorphic (of different form) alternation of generations, that are either blade shaped or filamentous. Two kinds of reproductive bodies (male and female (carpogonium)) are found on the blade shaped frond of Porphyra that is abundant during winter. On release these fuse and thereafter, division of the fertilized carpogonium is mitotic, and packets of diploid carpospores are formed. The released carpospores develop into the 'conchocelis' phase (the diploid sporophyte consisting of microscopic filaments), which bore into shells (and probably the chalk rock) and grow vegetatively. The conchocelis filaments reproduce asexually. In the presence of decreasing day length and falling temperatures, terminal cells of the conchocelis phase produce conchospores inside conchosporangia. Meiosis occurs during the germination of the conchospore and produces the macroscopic gametophyte (blade shaped phase) and the cycle is repeated (Cole & Conway, 1980).
Time for community to reach maturity
Disturbance is an important factor structuring the biotope, consequently the biotope is characterized by ephemeral algae able to rapidly exploit newly available substrata and that are tolerant of changes in the prevailing conditions, e.g. temperature, salinity and desiccation. For instance, following the Torrey Canyon tanker oil spill in mid March 1967, which bleached filamentous algae such as Ulva and adhered to the thin fronds of Porphyra, which after a few weeks became brittle and were washed away, regeneration of Porphyra and Ulva was noted by the end of April at Marazion, Cornwall. Similarly, at Sennen Cove where rocks had completely lost their cover of Porphyra and Ulva during April, by mid-May had occasional blade-shaped fronds of Porphyra sp. up to 15 cm long. These had either regenerated from basal parts of the 'Porphyra' phase or from the 'conchocelis' phase on the rocks (see recruitment processes). By mid-August these regenerated specimens were common and well grown but darkly pigmented and reproductively immature. Besides the Porphyra, a very thick coating of Ulva (as Enteromorpha) was recorded in mid-August (Smith 1968). Such evidence suggests that the community would reach maturity relatively rapidly and probably be considered mature in terms of the species present and ability to reproduce well within six months.
No text entered.
This review can be cited as follows:
Ulva spp. on freshwater-influenced or unstable upper eulittoral rock.
Marine Life Information Network: Biology and Sensitivity Key Information Sub-programme [on-line].
Plymouth: Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom.
Available from: <http://www.marlin.ac.uk/habitatecology.php?habitatid=104&code=2004>

The Language of Color
Sun, Aug 1, 2010 ~ Wed, Jul 31, 2013Times:
Open Daily, 9:00am - 5:00pm, Extended hours 4th Wednesdays Summer 2011Description:
Whether it's the brilliant blue wings of a butterfly, the scarlet feathers of a tanager, or the stripes of a zebra, animals display color in vastly different ways and for different reasons. Combining dramatic specimens with video presentations, computer interactives, hands-on activities, and a stunning display of live dart frogs, The Language of Color will help visitors understand the nature of color and pattern, how different animals "see" it, and how animal color and its perception have co-evolved to produce the complex and diverse palette of colors we see in the world today. The exhibit features a wide array of mammals, reptiles, amphibians, mollusks, and insect specimens that illustrate colors used to camouflage, startle predators, mimic other animals, attract a mate, or intimidate a rival.
Harvard Museum of Natural History
26 Oxford St.
7-8 Min Walk From Harvard Square
Cambridge, MA 02138Event Website
Contact Phone: (617) 496-0049

The NIDCD award will provide $300,000 over the next three years to fund the project, titled “Auditory masking effects on speech fluency in aphasia and apraxia of speech.”
In many adults who survive stroke, damage to speech regions of the brain results in a distorted, effortful, and halting pattern of speech, a condition called apraxia of speech. Although they know what they want to say and have intact muscle strength, they have difficulty programming the movements for speech. They are able to hear their speech errors, and the typical treatment program focuses on identifying these errors and correcting them. For most people, focusing on these mistakes results in little improvement in their speech.
In contrast to conventional treatment approaches, Dr. Jacks and his colleagues (Katarina Haley, PhD, DAHS, DSHS; Heidi Roth, MD, Department of Neurology) are studying the effects of preventing the person with apraxia of speech from hearing the errors in their speech, by playing loud noise through earphones. This approach is based on the premise that people with this speech disorder are overly-attuned to speech errors, which prevents them from speaking fluently. The same phenomenon has been known for decades to help people who stutter to speak fluently, as demonstrated in the popular film The King's Speech.
In the proposed research, Dr. Jacks and his colleagues seek to identify stroke survivors who respond positively to listening to noise by increasing speech rate and decreasing the occurrence of speech disfluencies (pauses, filler words, repetitions). Since not all people are expected to show a change in speech while listening to noise, the team also will study individual characteristics to determine what differentiates those who improve from those who do not. In particular, behavioral profiles (type of speech and language impairment) and location and size of brain lesion will be compared between positive responders and non-responders to determine whether a positive response can be predicted from routine clinical data.
In preliminary work, over half of the participants tested spoke more quickly and with fewer disfluencies while listening to noise. Although this is a temporary effect and does not persist after the noise is turned off, the moments of speech fluency experienced may cause the person's brain to activate in a different way than it does when he or she is speaking disfluently. If the preliminary results are borne out in the completed study, Dr. Jacks and his team believe that the procedure may be further developed into a useful therapeutic technique that can result in lasting speech changes.

Scientists have revealed that new treatments for the incurable nerve disease known as Lou Gehrig's disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) could be developed via a long-used anti-cancer drug.
Their research showing how the drug prevents clumping of an enzyme linked to ALS appears in the Journal of the American Chemical Society.
Lucia Banci, Ivano Bertini and colleagues explain that ALS causes a progressive loss of muscle control as the nerves that control body movements wither and die. Patients become weak and have difficulty swallowing and breathing, and most die within three to five years of diagnosis. Although some ALS cases are hereditary and run in families, about 90 percent are "sporadic," with the cause unknown. Some research links sporadic ALS to clumping of an antioxidant enzyme called hSOD1. The authors explored whether cisplatin, a chemotherapy drug used since the 1960s that is known to interact with some of the enzyme's amino acids, has any effect on hSOD1 clusters.
The scientists found that in laboratory tests, the anti-cancer drug cisplatin bound readily to the enzyme, preventing hSOD1 from aggregating and dissolving existing bunches. Cisplatin targets sites that can form bonds between hSOD1 after the enzyme loses the atom of copper it normally carries. The scientists note that cisplatin does not prevent the enzyme from performing its normal functions. "From this work it appears that cisplatin is a promising lead compound for the rational design of ALS treatments," the authors say.

The following information was extracted from the publication "Threatened"
produced by BNZ in cooperation with the Department of Conservation
and Royal Forest and Bird Protection Society.
The Predation Threat
In 1987, a dog was on the loose in Waitangi State forest in the Bay of Islands. For six weeks it rampaged through the forest killing every kiwi it encountered. By the time the dog was found, perhaps as many as 500 of the 1000 kiwi living there had been slaughtered. This carnage at Waitangi illustrates just how vulnerable the kiwi is to predators and the speed at which seemingly healthy populations can fail.
Other predators introduced to New Zealand by humans may cause similar havoc. The main threat to the kiwi is posed by: Possums, stoats, ferrets, and feral (wild) cats who steal eggs and kill young. Larger predators include pigs and dogs.
Young kiwi leave the nest at just three weeks of age, weighing only 200g. Small and slow, they are easy prey. Very few survive this precarious journey from birth to 12 months, when they reach the critical size that enables them to stand up to most predators.
Humans, primarily through destroying forests and introducing predators in the first place, pose the single greatest threat to the kiwi. Ironically, we are also their greatest hope.
The kiwi is a one-off evolutionary design, holding all sorts of biological records. New Zealand's ancient isolation and lack of mammals allowed it to occupy a habitat and lifestyle that everywhere else in the world would be occupied by a mammal.
Whereas birds traditionally depend on sight, the kiwi is one of the few birds with a highly developed sense of smell. You can sometimes hear them sniffing around in the dark. Alarm them during the day and they will run off. Then, at a distance, just like a wolf or other mammal, they'll stick their bill (nose) in the air, sniffing to see if they are safe from pursuit.
Other reasons the kiwi could pass for a mammal is its loose, hair-like feathers, its long whiskers, the fact it can't fly and that it burrows in the ground.
Other kiwi curiosities include:
Being the only known bird to have external nostrils at the end of its bill. It literally sniffs out its food a bill-length below the surface.
It's huge eggs. The kiwi has one of the largest egg-to-body weight ratio of any bird. The mature egg averages 20% of the female's body weight. Compare that to 2% for an ostrich!
Being the smallest living member of the ratite family (which includes ostriches and emus).
They live in pairs — as monogamous couples — for most, if not all of their lives.
Sex role reversal: The female is bigger and dominates the male.
In some varieties, the male does most of the incubating of the eggs.
The eggs take an exceedingly long time to hatch — up to 80 days.
Kiwi tend to live in pairs, forming monogamous couples. These bonds are generally till death and have been known to last over 30 years. About every third day, the pair will shelter in the same burrow together. The relationship tends to be quite volatile and physical, the female generally calling the shots over her smaller partner.
During the night, as they are out foraging for food or patrolling their territory, they will perform duets, calling to each other. The female has a lower hoarser call than the male.
From the outside, it doesn't appear that kiwi domestic life is bliss. But the bond is long-lasting.
There are few surprises in the kiwi diet. It's mostly earthworms, spiders, fallen fruits and seeds, larvae of beetles and cicada and a mixture of forest invertebrates. But they will also take large food items like freshwater crays and even frogs. In captivity, kiwi have fished eels out of a pond, subdued them with a few thuds and eaten them.
Kiwi are extremely territorial birds, They protect their patch — which can be as much as 40 hectares — by calling or, if that fails, by chasing the intruder kiwi and giving it a good booting over. Very occasionally, kiwi kill each other fighting for territory.
Acutely aware of neighbours, they will often engage in calling duels. If a bird is intruding into another's space, it will rush back at full speed into its own space before returning a neighbour's call.
A gathering of kiwi is a rarity. However, on Stewart Island, they do live in small, mixed aged family groupings.
Kiwi Nests, er, Burrows!
Kiwi are burrowers. They may quickly clear a burrow at the end of a night's work, crash there during the day and then move on to a new burrow the next day.
Great Spotted Kiwi prefer dens. Unlike the Little Spotted Kiwi and the Brown Kiwi, who tends towards simple one-entrance burrows, the Great Spotted will put the time and effort into constructing a labyrinth of tunnels several metres long with more than one exit.
Common Kiwi Myths
Kiwi experts are keen to dispel myths surrounding the kiwi — particularly that they are half-blind and bumbling.
Here are a few common ones:
Myth: "Kiwi fight with their beaks."
To use their beaks to fight would be like head-butting someone with your nose.
At the end of the beak are the kiwi's external nostrils. Finely tuned and capable of detecting a few parts per million of scent, the beak, when probing the ground, can detect worms and other food.
Myth: "Kiwi are cute, gentle little creatures."
They are actually super-strong and often extremely bad tempered. The adults can look after themselves using their razor sharp claws as weapons. A couple of slashes can quickly draw blood — as conservationists have often found when putting their hands down kiwi burrows.
Because they are so aggressive, DOC staff can attract them simply by imitating their call. Incensed that another kiwi is on their turf, the response is instant and dramatic:
"It's amazing to hear them coming to kick the intruder out. They sound like a deer charging, almost exploding, through the dark. Standing there, it's quite intimidating. I guess it's part of the threat display."
"Pete" is a Great Spotted Kiwi in West Northland. "We've just got to walk into his territory and he comes catapulting in for a hit-and-run. He belts you in the leg and then runs off into the undergrowth. I think he views us as super-big kiwi. He's probably given some trampers a helluva scare."
Myth: "Kiwi are a bit thick."
According to Conservation Officers who know them best, they are capable of learning quickly and altering behaviour in the light of experience.
Myth: "Kiwi move slowly."
Superbly adapted to their natural habitat, the kiwi is extremely agile and quick moving. A kiwi can cover his territory — possibly the size of 60 football fields — in a night. This might take in three valley streams and all sorts of obstacles.
Myth: "Kiwi and half-blind."
The notion of their being half-blind probably stems from their being nocturnal and having small eyes. In fact, as Conservation Officers can testify, if you chase them at night, they can run very fast, swerving around trees and expertly navigating the undergrowth. Similarly, they are unfazed by daylight.
Kiwi Culture -- From a Maori Perspective
The Maori people have a very personal interest in seeing the kiwi survive and flourish.
According to many Maori traditions, the kiwi is the oldest of all Tanemahuta's bird family. It was Tane, the god of the forest who, with different wives, created much of the natural world, including birds, trees, stones and humans.
For Maori, kiwi are, in effect, our elder siblings. And, like a good older brother or sister, they are very protective of us. That's partly why they patrol the forests nightly.
Kiwi -- Six Unique Varieties
There are six identified varieties of kiwi.
The Little Spotted Kiwi
The smallest (about the size of a bantam) and most endangered species, the "Little Spots" have a very mellow, often docile nature. They have suffered terrible that the hands of possums, stoats, cats and larger predators.
Now extinct on mainland New Zealand, the largest remaining population is on Kapiti Island where 1000 birds occupy some 1900 ha of mixed forest, scrub and grassland. Sensitive management by DoC and the Maori Trustees of private land on Kapiti are ensuring that cats, dogs and other kiwi predators don't reach the island.
The Great Spotted Kiwi
The rugged mountaineer of the kiwi — found primarily in the high, often harsh hill country — the Great Spotted has forged a strange deal with evolution. The same harsh environment that makes it struggle from one day to the next also makes it tough going for the pigs, dogs and stoats that would otherwise be keen to pursue it.
Big bold and handsome, it is found only in the South Island, mainly in North West Nelson, Central Westland and Eastern Canterbury.
The North Island Brown Kiwi
Bug noses and short tempers is one way to sum up the Brown Kiwi. They are little toughies ... and have to be to survive against humans, introduced predators and the natural challenges of their often harsh bush existence.
The North Island Brown Kiwi is found only in the upper two-thirds of the North Island. They are widespread in Northland in a diverse range of vegetation types including exotic forests and rough farm land.
Okarito Brown Kiwi
In one sense, the new kid on the block. It was only in 1993 that the Okarito Brown, living in lowland forest just north of Franz Josef was identified as a distinct variety of kiwi. Tell-tale signs are its slightly greyish plumage sometimes accompanied by white facial feathers.
Squat and round and bigger than their northern Brown Kiwi cousins, they can grow to almost the same size as Great Spotted Kiwi. The Southern Tokoeka are found in Fiordland and on Stewart Island. They are the most communal of the somewhat reclusive kiwi.
The Haast Tokoeka, found in the rugged mountains behind Haast, was also identified as a distant variety of Kiwi in 1993. They spend their summers in the high sub alpine tussock grasslands but probably retreat to the lowland forests in winter.
Kiwi Sightings -- Where You Can See Kiwi
Few of us get the chance to see a kiwi in the wild but Brown Kiwi can be seen at the following places:

The Civics merit badge was one of the original 57 merit badges issued by the Boy Scouts of America in 1911.
Civics is a discontinued merit badge. It was one of the original 1911 merit badges, but was renamed Citizenship by the 1948 revision to the Boy Scout Handbook. That badge was then replaced by Citizenship in the Nation in in 1951 and Citizenship in the Community and Citizenship in the Home in 1952 (later renamed as the Family Life merit badge). At the same time, the World Brotherhood merit badge was introduced, and these four badges constituted the "Citizenship Group" of merit badges, any two of which were required for Eagle. In 1972, the Citizenship in the World merit badge replaced World Brotherhood.
Civics requirements at inception
- State the principal citizenship requirements of an elector in his state.
- Know the principal features of the naturalization laws of the United States.
- Know how President, Vice-President, senators, and congressmen of the United States are elected and their terms of office.
- Know the number of judges of the Supreme Court of the United States, how appointed, and their term of office.
- Know the various administrative departments of government, as represented in the President's Cabinet.
- Know how the governor, lieutenant-governor, senators, representatives, or assemblymen of his state are elected, and their terms of office.
- Know whether the judges of the principal courts in his state are appointed or elected, and the length of their terms.
- Know how the principal officers in his town or city are elected and for what terms.
- Know the duties of the various city departments, such as fire, police, board of health, etc.
- Draw a map of the town or city in which he lives, giving location of the principal public buildings and points of special interest.
- Give satisfactory evidence that he is familiar with the provisions and history of the Declaration of Independence, and the Constitution of the United States.
|| The official source for the information shown in this article or section is:|
Boy Scout Handbook, 1911 Edition
The text of these requirements is locked and can only be edited by an administrator.
Please note any errors found in the above requirements on this article's Talk Page.

My Beef With Meat
If it has a face, it probably gobbles up global resources along with its grass
By Stett Holbrook
Last month, the federal government released a much-anticipated report on global climate change. It paints a chilling picture of what will happen if global warming continues unabated. "This report is a game-changer," said the new director of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Jane Lubchenco, at a press conference last week. "I think that much of the foot-dragging in addressing climate change is a reflection of the perception that climate change is way down the road, it's in the future and it only affects certain parts of the country. This report demonstrates in concrete scientific information that climate change is happening now, and it's happening in our back yards."
The report, issued by the U.S. Global Change Research Program, compiles work from 13 different government agencies. In a refreshing break from the science-averse Bush administration, the report states unequivocally that climate change is human caused. The report details changes scientists are already seeing and predicts how the climate will change if greenhouse-gas emissions aren't curtailed. The report also discusses how decisive policies can roll back the impending doom. (Read the report at globalchange.gov.) Here are two of the key findings:
• Climate changes are under way in the United States and are projected to grow. These include increases in heavy downpours, rising temperature and sea level, rapidly retreating glaciers, thawing permafrost, lengthening growing seasons, lengthening ice-free seasons in the ocean and on lakes and rivers, earlier snowmelt and alterations in river flows.
• Agriculture is considered one of the sectors most adaptable to changes in climate, but increased heat, pests, water stress, diseases and weather extremes will pose adaptation challenges for crop and livestock production.
There have been many reports on global warming and dire predictions from respected scientists. So far not much has changed. I hope that President Obama uses the power of his position to spur the dramatic and speedy action needed to reduce the profound impacts of the crisis. The challenge Obama faces is convincing people that the time to change our ways is today, not tomorrow. The trouble is, we don't usually realize we're in trouble until the roof starts caving in. For example, only when we faced global financial meltdown did world leaders act. A global recession is real and painful, but compared to the apocalyptic effects of unchecked global warming, it's but a pinprick.
What does all this have to do with food? Well, while the U.S. government appears to be finally getting serious about acting against global warming, we the people need to do as much as we can. Food strikes me as particularly target-rich as we seek to reduce global warming. I see reducing our consumption of meat as the single most important action we can take as individuals. I've come to view a double bacon cheeseburger as the culinary equivalent of dumping dirty motor oil into a clear mountain lake. If eating burgers was only detrimental to those who eat them that would be one thing, but the production of meat and dairy across the world is an environmental catastrophe.
I'm a firm believer in spending more for quality, food included. But eating well shouldn't be prohibitively expensive. I guess it's all in how one defines "eating well." For me, that means little or no processed food and plenty of fresh produce in season. Food is of course a necessary expense, but there's a lot of discretion on how to spend your food dollar. But the ironic thing about food when you buy fresh, unprocessed ingredients and cook for yourself rather than opening a can or box, eating well generally costs less. At least that's my belief.
According to the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), livestock production generates nearly a fifth of the world's greenhouse gases, more than transportation. Animal agriculture is the leading source of methane and nitrous oxide emissions, which--combined with carbon dioxide--are the primary causes of global warming. Livestock production accounts for more than 8 percent of global human water use, the FAO says. Evidence suggests that it is also the largest source of water pollution thanks to animal wastes, antibiotics, hormones, fertilizers and pesticides used for feed crops, and sediments from eroded pastures. An estimated 30 percent of the Earth's ice-free land is involved in livestock production. Approximately 70 percent of previously forested land in the Amazon is used as pasture, and feed crops cover a large part of what's left.
Eating organically raised, grass-feed beef is a far better option than the factory-farmed garbage that most of us eat. But organically raised or not, livestock still sucks up scarce natural resources and contributes to global warming. I'm not saying we should give up meat entirely. Just eat less of it. Given the severity of the climate crisis, reducing our consumption of meat is a painless step everyone can take. What if President Obama declared he was willing to go without meat a few days a week for the sake of the planet? I'm not holding my breath for that one, but more often than not I'm going to hold off on eating meat.
Send a letter to the editor about this story.

Increasing Local Contrast
The previous section showed adjustments to the brightness and contrast of the entire image. The adjustment changes every pixel of original brightness value A to the same final brightness value B, regardless of the pixel’s neighbors. Another class of operations increases the visibility of local differences between pixels, by suppressing the longer-range variations. These neighborhood functions use a moving neighborhood, usually a small circle, that compares or combines the central pixel and the neighbors to produce a new value that is assigned to the central pixel to construct a new image. Then the neighborhood shifts to the next pixel and the process is repeated. These calculations are applied to the pixel brightness values in a color coordinate system such as HSI or LAB that leaves the color values unchanged.
For instance, local equalization functions just like the histogram equalization procedure, except that it takes place within a moving circular neighborhood and assigns a new value only to the central pixel. The result makes a pixel that is slightly brighter than its surroundings brighter still, and vice-versa, enhancing local contrast. The result is usually added back in some proportion to the original image to produce a more visually pleasing result, as shown in the Local Equalization interactive Java tutorial.
Sharpening of images to increase local contrast is almost universally applied by publishers to counter the visual blurring effect of halftoning images in the printing process. This is usually done by a convolution using a kernel of weights, just as the Gaussian smoothing function shown above. But in this application, some of those weights will have negative values. For instance, the Laplacian sharpening filter in Table 1 combines each pixel with its eight adjacent neighbors as shown in the Laplacian Sharpening interactive Java tutorial.
A more flexible extension of this basic idea is the widely used (and as often misused) unsharp mask. The name derives from a century-old darkroom procedure that required printing the original image at 1:1 magnification but out of focus onto another piece of film (this was the unsharp mask), and then placing the two films together to print the final result. Where the original negative was dense, the mask was not (and vice versa) so that little light was transmitted, except near detail and edges where the mask was out of focus.
The same effect can be produced in the computer by applying a Gaussian blur to a duplicate of the original and then subtracting it from the original. The difference between the two images is just the detail and edges removed by the blurring. The original image is then added back to the difference to increase the visibility of the details while suppressing the overall image contrast. In the Unsharp Masking interactive Java tutorial, the result image is automatically scaled to the range of the display so that negative values that can result from the calculation are not lost.
One of the characteristics of the unsharp mask is the formation of bright and dark “haloes” adjacent to the dark and bright borders (respectively) of structure in the image. This increases their visibility, but can hide other nearby information. A related approach using neighborhood ranking rather than Gaussian blurring alleviates this problem. The method applies a median filter to remove fine detail, subtracts this from the original to isolate the detail, and then adds the original image back to enhance the visibility as shown in the Rank Masking interactive Java tutorial. This method is called a rank mask, but is sometimes (incorrectly) referred to as a top hat filter (the real top hat is shown below).
Note that all of these local enhancement methods are very noise sensitive, because both random speckle and shot noise produce pixels that are different from their local neighborhood. Image noise must be removed before enhancement is attempted, or the visibility of the noise will be increased as shown in the Comparison of Local Contrast Enhancement Methods interactive Java tutorial.
The top hat filter is also a based on neighborhood ranking, but unlike the procedure above it uses the ranked value from two different size regions. The brightest value in a circular interior region is compared to the brightest value in a surrounding annular region. If the brightness difference exceeds a threshold level, it is kept (otherwise it is erased). The Top Hat Filter interactive Java tutorial shows the filter’s operation. If the interior and annular regions are drawn as shown in the diagram in Figure 1, the reason for the filter name becomes apparent. The interior region is the crown and the threshold is its height, while the surrounding annulus is the brim of the hat. This operation is particularly well suited for finding the spikes in Fourier transform power spectra, as illustrated previously.
The top hat is also good for locating any features of a known size by adjusting the radius of the crown. Objects too large to fit into the crown of the hat are selectively removed. Reversing the logic to use the darkest values in both regions enables the same procedure to isolate dust or other dark features. By replacing the interior value by the mean of the surroundings, the dust can be selectively removed. In this application, shown in the Rolling Ball Filter interactive Java tutorial, the method is called a rolling ball filter.
John C. Russ - Materials Science and Engineering Dept., North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, 27695.
Matthew Parry-Hill and Michael W. Davidson - National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, 1800 East Paul Dirac Dr., The Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, 32310.
Questions or comments? Send us an email.
© 1998-2009 by Michael W. Davidson, John Russ, Olympus America Inc., and The Florida State University. All Rights Reserved. No images, graphics, scripts, or applets may be reproduced or used in any manner without permission from the copyright holders. Use of this website means you agree to all of the Legal Terms and Conditions set forth by the owners.
This website is maintained by our

of the Giant Squid scientifically known as Architeuthis
dux, is the largest of all invertebrates. Scientists
believe it can be as long as 18 metres (60 feet). This specimen
was collected by Dr Gordon Williamson who worked as the resident
ships biologist for the whaling company Salvesons. He examined
the stomach contents of 250 Sperm Whales Physeter macrocephalus
keeping the largest squid beak and discarding the smaller until
he ended up with this magnificent specimen.

Air pollution health alert and advisory issued through Wednesday, March 10
The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) has issued an air pollution health ALERT for today and tomorrow, March 8 and 9 and an air pollution health ADVISORY for Wednesday, March 10 for the Twin Cities and Rochester area. The Air Quality Index values (AQI) in the Twin Cities exceeds the level considered unhealthy for sensitive groups.
Dense fog overnight, which aids in fine particle production, and calm winds, have allowed fine particle concentrations to build to levels considered unhealthy for sensitive groups. Fine particle levels are expected to gradually fall this afternoon as the fog dissipates. However, calm winds and high relative humidity will continue to trap pollutants, keeping air quality conditions unhealthy for sensitive groups. Weather conditions are supposed to improve the air quality to good AQI levels by Thursday, March 11.
Those who have respiratory or cardiovascular problems, young children, the elderly, and individuals whom are physically active are considered especially sensitive to elevated levels of air pollution. Be prepared to postpone or reduce vigorous activity. Ozone and fine particles can be drawn deeply into the lungs, so reduce activities that lead to deep or accelerated breathing. Even individuals that are otherwise healthy may experience health effects when air pollutant levels increase.
How you can help:
Residents can take simple steps to help reduce emissions that create smog. Motor vehicle emissions contribute to fine particle pollution. To lower levels of air pollution, the MPCA is urging residents to use alternate modes of transportation such as mass transit, car pools, biking and walking to work or shop.
Other measures that will help reduce emissions on days when the Index reaches 100 and above include:
1. Limit driving - share a ride to work and postpone errands until the next day.
2. Don’t idle your vehicle for more than three minutes**
3. Refuel your vehicle after 6 p.m.
4. Leave your car at home and walk, bike, carpool or take public transportation whenever you can.
5. Postpone using other gasoline-powered engines, like garden and recreational equipment.
6. Postpone indoor and outdoor recreational fires.
7. To reduce the demand on power plants, turn off as many electric items as possible.
8. If you fall in the sensitive group category, arrange to work indoors for the day.
**The City of Minneapolis approved limits on vehicle idling that aim to reduce air pollution in Minneapolis. The ordinance, which was passed in 2008, limits most vehicle idling to three minutes, except in traffic. Reducing vehicle idling in Minneapolis translates into less air pollution, protecting the public health and the environment and saving money in fuel. Vehicle motors release particulate matter, dirt, nitrous oxides, hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide into the air.
Published Mar. 8, 2010

You're using more water than you think
A water footprint is the total volume of freshwater used to produce the goods and services consumed. Here are some ways to lighten your water footprint.
Fri, Aug 31 2012 at 11:28 AM
Prodded by environmental consciousness — or penny pinching — you installed low-flow showerheads and fixed all the drippy facets. Knowing that your manicured lawn was sucking down an unnatural amount of water — nearly 7 billion gallons of water is used to irrigate home landscaping, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency — you ripped up the turf and replaced it with native plants.
You’re still using a lot more water than you think.
The drought of 2012 has generated images of parched landscapes and sun-baked lakebeds. At least 36 states are projecting water shortages between now and 2013, according to a survey by the federal General Accounting Office. Water supplies are finite, and fickle.
Water, we all know, is essential to life. It is also essential to agriculture, industry, energy and the production of trendy T-shirts. We all use water in ways that go way beyond the kitchen and bathroom. The measure of both direct and indirect water use is known as the water footprint.
Your water footprint is the total volume of freshwater used to produce the goods and services consumed, according to the Water Footprint Network, an international nonprofit foundation based in the Netherlands. The Water Footprint Network has crunched the numbers and developed an online calculator to help you determine the size of your footprint.
You’ll be astonished to know how much water you’re using … once you’ve converted all those metric measurements into something you can understand.
The average American home uses about 260 gallons of water per day, according to the EPA.
That quarter-pound burger you just gobbled down? More than 600 gallons of water.
That Ramones T-shirt? More than 700 gallons.
So, adjustments to your diet and buying habits can have a much greater impact on the size of your water footprint than taking 40-second showers.
A pound of beef, for example, takes nearly 1,800 gallons of water to produce, with most of that going to irrigate the grains and grass used to feed the cattle. A pound of chicken demands just 468 gallons. If you really want to save water, eat more goat. A pound of goat requires 127 gallons of water.
We’ve been told to cut down on our use of paper to save the forests, but going paperless also saves water. It takes more than 1,300 gallons of water to produce a ream of copy paper.
Even getting treated water to your house requires electricity. Letting your faucet run for five minutes, the EPA says, uses about as much energy as burning a 60-watt light bulb for 14 hours. Reducing your water footprint also reduces your carbon footprint, the amount of greenhouse gases your lifestyle contributes to the atmosphere and global warming.
So, you could say that conserving water is more than hot air. It’s connected to almost everything you do.
Related water stories on MNN:

|About the presenter: Patricia M. Roberts, Ph.D., CCC-SLP, SLP(C), currently Associate Professor in speech language pathology at the University of Ottawa, in Canada's capital. She holds degrees from Queen's University (Kingston, Canada) and Florida State University and obtained her Ph.D. from the Universite de Montreal.In her first career as a clinical SLP, she worked with many bilingual clients and was privileged to have the late Marie Poulos as colleague and mentor. She is spending much of her 2nd career as a professor and researcher trying to understand the many unsolved puzzles of bilingual stuttering.|
In this presentation, I will focus on four mysteries (things we do not yet know) about stuttering in bilingual children and adults and some of the myths associated with these gaps in our current knowledge.
To make this essay easier to read, I won't say "bilingual or multilingual" each time the word "bilingual" comes up but in most places, what applies to bilinguals also applies to multilingual speakers - as far as we know - so far.
Mystery 1: How many bilingual people are there?
It is sometimes confusing to even try to discuss bilingualism because the word bilingual means different things to different people. For some people, bilinguals are people who speak two (or more - for multilinguals) languages equally and perfectly. People who speak two languages in their daily lives, and can do most things such as talking to people at work, reading the newspaper, understanding conversations with friends sometimes say "Oh yes, I can do all that. But I am not bilingual". Other people describe themselves as bilingual if they can communicate basic ideas, even if they make many errors in grammar and pronunciation and have a very small vocabulary in one language.
In research, both these kinds of people are seen as having different levels of bilingualism. Ratings from 1 to 7 or 1 to 9 are often used to estimate where each person falls along the continuous line that goes from "I really ONLY know one language" to "I am one of those rare people who feels equally at home in two languages, no matter what the task or topic". For speaking, hearing, reading, and writing, most of us are at slightly different levels of ability, in each of the languages we know.
For this essay - and the discussions I hope it will spark - let's think of bilingualism as being a continuum. We don't divide the world into tall people and short people. There is no rational cut-off to separate "tall" from "short". Same thing for "bilingual" and "unilingual". Everyone is at some point along the line that goes from strongly unilingual to very, very bilingual.
With a broad definition of bilingualism, some authors estimate that there are at least as many people in the world who need to use two or more languages in their daily lives as there are people who can only function in one language (see, for example, Bhatia & Ritchie, 2006). We cannot make precise estimates unless we first define what levels of bilingualism are included or excluded from the count (and where to divide dialects from languages).
Mystery 2: Is the incidence of stuttering the same in different languages?
There are studies of the incidence of stuttering in different countries. Some authors use these studies to say things like "the incidence of stuttering is higher in Country X than in Country Y". But, if each study used different ways of sampling and different ways of determining who stutters, it is not valid to compare across studies. For example, from one study to the next, different methods were used in deciding who is stuttering: parent reports? Teachers in schools or day care centres? Parents remembering what the child was like 5 or 10 years ago? There are also differences in what counts as stuttering: only for a few months at age 3? Only people who stuttered for more than a year? Only those who reach a given level of severity?
When people see these reports, they often speculate about why the incidence figures SEEM to be different (ignoring the differences in how the estimates were reached), often using their favourite aspect of stuttering as the explanation. Thus, we see explanations like:
1) "There is more stuttering in Country X than in Country Y because the grammar of the language spoken in Country X makes greater demands on memory...." The complexity of a language might be relevant, in some subtle ways including the location of moments of stuttering within a sentence. Concluding that the language itself influences the number of people who stutter requires a huge, dangerous leap of logic. There are other possible explanations that have to be ruled out before we can select one of them and reject the others.
2) "There is more stuttering in ___ because that culture views speaking well as very important and the pressure to speak well makes people stutter". This explanation now seems very unlikely, given what we know about the causes of stuttering.
Now that we understand the importance of genetics and the inherited nature of stuttering for many people, it seems logical to ask whether, in some ethnic groups, more people carry the genes that make them vulnerable to stuttering than is the case in other ethnic groups. Perhaps the genetic pool, not cultural or linguistic features, has the strongest influence on the incidence of stuttering. Or, more likely, perhaps several causal factors contribute, interacting with each others in ways we do not yet understand.
The only way we will ever know if the incidence of stuttering varies across languages or countries is to do international, collaborative studies where the same rigourous methods are used in everywhere THEN we can propose explanations for the similar or differing rates of stuttering in different languages and/or countries.
Mystery 3: Does speaking more than one language increase the risk of a child stuttering?
Many people think it does. For the general public, it seems logical. Sometimes people reason this way: 1) Speaking two languages is hard. 2) For children who stutter, speaking is hard. 3) Therefore, children who stutter (or those who are at risk of developing stuttering, because of a known family history) should not be expected to learn two languages.
In the research on stuttering, the Demands and Capacities model of stuttering seems to apply here. But is it "hard" to learn two languages or is this a myth? If learning two languages as a young child is neurologically or cognitively strenuous, why is it that tens of millions of children do so successfully? Are their brains slightly stressed if they have to sort out two languages during the best language-learning years in childhood? Most of the research on bilingualism says "no". However, bilingualism is seen as something very positive by most people who do research on it, and most studies are designed to detect advantages and not problems associated with bilingualism. Also, this research is based on children with no speech or language problems. In children with a genetic vulnerability to stuttering, is learning two sets of words and grammar rules, and two sets of speech sounds harder than it is for children without this vulnerability? If learning two languages as a child is much harder than learning one, is it all potentially bilingual children or only a sub-group of those who might be at risk for stuttering?
How should we interpret the recent and somewhat controversial study by Howell, Davis and Williams (2009) that found a higher incidence of stuttering in children if they began learning English (the language of their new country? before age 5? Were there other reasons for the finding that children who learned English before starting school were more likely to stutter than those who reportedly began learning English when they began school in London, England? (See Packman, et al, 2009 letter to the editor and Howell et al.'s reply.)
There are four other, older studies that have led some people to conclude that bilingualism is too great a strain for children who stutter. In each case, these studies have serious flaws that make it impossible to draw any conclusions from them. Travis, Johnson and Shover (1937) asked people with no training in communication disorders (such as priests and steel company personnel directors) to talk to young children and classify them as stuttering or not stuttering based on one interview. Stern (1948) interviewed children if their parents reported that they stuttered. In both these studies, we have little information about the type of speech sample obtained, how long it was or how the disfluencies were counted. Applying current standards to these studies, they would not be accepted for publication.
Dale (1977) reported that four Cuban-American teenagers reported feeling that being made to speak their weaker language made them more disfluent. Most bilinguals have a stronger and a weaker language. For these teens, their first language - Spanish - was their weaker language, since so much of their lives at school and with friends took place in English, their second language. This study "blames" bilingualism. But we have no information about real disfluency rates across different situations, and Dale does not distinguish between normal disfluencies and tense, stuttered disfluencies. There are studies showing that, in adults, the memory load of speaking in their weaker language may lead to a higher number of normal disfluencies (ums, uh's, revisions) in the weaker language than in the preferred language (e.g., Fehringer & Fry, 2007). Perhaps that is all that was happening in this study. Dale offers no data to support the notion that any of the four adolescents, in fact, stuttered.
Karniol (1992) described how stuttering appeared to increase and decrease in a young boy whose environment included exposure to various levels of English, Hebrew, and Hungarian during an extremely tense time that included a war going on around him. With the information provided, we cannot tell what his real level of exposure to each language was (siblings, friends, parents etc.) and whether his parents' attempts to expose him to only Hebrew had any impact on what is described as a recovery from stuttering. The parents' diaries cover a period of approximately one year (age 2 to age 3) when the boy was in the age group where the chances of spontaneous recovery from stuttering are very, very high.
There is (still) no clinical research to support the strategy of removing one language from a child's environment. Recent reviews of the literature do not find support for doing this routinely for all children (e.g., Bernstein Ratner, 2004; Roberts & Shenker, 2007; Van Borsel, Maes & Foulon, 2001). Some clinicians do this, however, if they work in a Demands and Capacities framework OR if the child also has delayed language and/or problems learning the speech sounds of his/her language. Until there is solid evidence on the impact of bilingualism in young children (i.e. a series of studies, done by different authors, ideally on different types of speakers and different pairs of languages), each clinician is left to try a particular strategy and assess its impact on a case by case basis.
Mystery 4: Do some bilingual people stutter in only one language?
As of 2010, I am still not aware of any documented case of this occurring. Like the Loch Ness monster, there are reported sightings from time to time, but no real proof that this is possible. In my years working with bilingual adults who stutter, I never assessed or treated a case of "unilingual stuttering". (Note: if you know of someone who stutters in only one of their two (or more) languages, I would be interested in exploring this with you. Just because there are no documented cases does not mean that it never occurs !)
Nonetheless, given the roles of genetics and motor processes in stuttering, it is highly unlikely that someone would stutter in only one of their languages. Van Riper (1971) cites second- and third-hand reports of two people reported to stutter in only one of their two languages, but offers no data. Howell, Davis and Williams (2009) report that 2 of the 38 children in their bilingual group stuttered in only one language, but there is no supporting data about the rates of disfluencies, or the level of proficiency in each language and the children were not assessed using a range of speaking tasks.
Roberts and Shenker (2007, Table 1) outlined the steps that would be required to show that someone with a working knowledge of two languages stutters in only one language. Sometimes, when someone appears to stutter in only one language it could be for one or more of the following reasons:
There are more and more studies about stuttering in different languages and some studies (and soon, a new book edited by Howell and Van Borsel) that focus specifically on stuttering in bilingual speakers. This is a very welcome change. Ten or fifteen years ago, there was little awareness that bilingual stuttering was a topic that needed exploring. Perhaps in a future ISAD forum, there will be articles about the answers to the questions raised in this one.
Bernstein Ratner, N. (2004). Fluency and stuttering in bilingual children. In B.Goldstein (Ed.) Bilingual language development and disorders in Spanish-English speakers (pp. 287-308). Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes.
Bhatia, T.K., & Ritchie, W.C. (2006). Introduction. In T.K. Bhatia & W.C. Ritchie (Eds.) The Handbook of Bilingualism (pp. 1-2), Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Dale, P. (1977). Factors relating to disfluent speech in bilingual Cuban-American adolescents. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 2, 311-314.
Fehringer, C., & Fry, C. (2007). Hesitation phenomena in the language production of bilingual speakers. Folia Linguistica, 41, 37-72.
Howell, P., Davis, S. Williams,R. ( 2009). The effects of bilingualism on stuttering during late childhood. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 94, 42-46
Karniol, R. (1992). Stuttering out of bilingualism. First Language, 12, 255-283.
Packman,A., Onslow, M., Reilly, S. et al. (2009). Stuttering and bilingualism. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 94, 248. (a letter to the editor re the Howell, Davis and Williams study)
Roberts, P.M. & Shenker, R.C. (2007). Assessment and treatment of stuttering in bilingual speakers. In R.F. Curlee & E.G. Conture (Eds). Stuttering and related disorders of fluency 3rd edition (pp. 183-209). New York: Thieme Medical Publishers.
Stern, E. (1948). A preliminary study of bilingualism and stuttering in four Johannesburg schools. Journal of Logopedics, 1, 15-25.
Travis, L.E., Johnson, W., & Shover, J. (1937). The relation of bilingualism to stuttering: a survey in the east Chicago, Indiana, Schools. Journal of Speech Disorders, 12, 185-189.
Van Borsel, J. Maes, E., & Foulon, S. (2001). Stuttering and bilingualism: A review. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 26, 179-205.

As America's independence was being declared in Philadelphia in l776, Padre Francisco Garces trekked through the Mojave area, leaving traces of his visit at Willow Springs, near Rosamond, and on Castle Butte, near California City.
Garces was followed by famous pathfinders like Jedediah Smith, in 1827, John C. Fremont, Kit Carson and Wyatt Earp. Many of these visitors, including a group from the ill-fated Manly-Jayhawker Party, used the Midland Trail, which roughly parallels Highway 14 north of town.
Wagon trails to the Panamint mines were established by men like M.M. Belshaw and others who are remembered in many local street names.
Mojave was established in 1876 when the Southern Pacific Railroad laid out the original plat for a town on its line between Los Angeles and San Francisco over nearby Tehachapi Pass. The first passenger train arrived August 8, 1876, which is celebrated as Mojave's birthday. Chinese coolies built a line from Mojave to Needles, California, on the Colorado River, reaching the Arizona border in 1883. That line was sold to the Santa Fe Railway in 1898, granting that railroad trackage rights over Tehachapi Pass. Today the Southern Pacific is now part of the Union Pacific Railroad, while Santa Fe is now part of the giant Burlington Northern Santa Fe.
The UP's Lone Pine Branch, which runs north out of Mojave, was built by Southern Pacific in 1910 to aid in constructing the Los Angeles Aqueduct. The line connected with the Carson and Colorado Narrow Gauge Railroad at Owenyo, providing, for a time, a direct rail link between Los Angeles and the Southern Pacific's Overland Route over Donner Summit. The Lone Pine branch now carries coal to and potash products from the Trona Railway connection at Searles Station, between Randsburg and Ridgecrest. Another rail line, the Oak Creek Branch, runs west from Mojave to the California Portland Cement plant at Creal, carrying coal up and cement back.
Mojave's flimsy buildings were destroyed by fire several times over the next century, most spectacularly in 1884 when 90 cases of powder in the railroad depot exploded with a bang heard 25 miles away.
GOLD was discovered in 1894 on Soledad Mountain and at other nearby locations, spwning mines with colorful names like Elephant-Eagle, Asher, Yellow Dog and Golden Queen.
Mojave's history of providing hospitality to weary travelers, a tradition that continues to this day, began with the opening of the Morrissey Hotel in 1876. The famous Fred Harvey organization operated a "Harvey House," in the old two-story railroad depot, complete with a contingent of "Harvey Girls" serving delicious meals to travelers and miners.
BORAX played a role in Mojave's history, especially between 1884 and 1889 when the famous 20-Mule Team Wagons hauled borax between mines in Death Valley and the railroad in Mojave, a 160 mile, 15-day trip. A monument on Sierra Highway in front of the Kentucky Fried Chicken store honors the spot where the wagons unloaded. The huge wagons, which can be seen at Death Valley and in nearby Boron, were built by J.W.S. Perry on land at the southeast corner of K and Nadeau Streets, the present location of Don's Oil Changers. Perry charged $900 each for his wagons.
CEMENT production began in the area in 1908 to provide cement for the Los Angeles Aqueduct. The plant has been modernized over the years and is operated today by Calaveras Cement. California Portland Cement built the Creal plant west of Mojave in 1955. The plant is one of the world's most modern.
Several small AIRPORTS were built in the Mojave area over the years, including Meyer Field behind the homes along Barstow Road. Mojave Airport began life in 1942 when a Naval Air Station was built on the present site on the east side of town. During World War II the field trained thousands of Navy and Marine pilots for combat, using SBD dive bombers and F4U Corsairs.
Decommissioned after the war, the field was reborn to again train pilots for the Korean Conflict. Closed again in 1959, the airport entered its third life in 1972 with formation of the Mojave (now East Kern) Airport District. Jump to the Mojave Airport page for more information on this facility, home of the National Test Pilot School, Burt Rutan's Scaled Composites, XCOR Aerospace and Voyager, the first aircraft to circumnavigate the globe without refueling.
Mojave's rich past is prelude to the history that continues to be made on the land and in the air - and soon, space - above this exciting and interesting region.

The Getting Word oral history project was begun at Monticello in 1993 to preserve the histories of the African American families at Thomas Jefferson’s Virginia plantation. Over 100 interviews with their descendants and additional archival research have brought remarkable individuals out of the shadows of slavery. We can now tell the stories of people whose lives and achievements were all but erased over the last 200 years.
"I remember hearing..."
Listen to the “way back” tales of Monticello and the newer stories of fighting for justice, as descendants bring to light the lives of their ancestors and the values they passed down.
“This is our family”
See how stories about the African Americans of Monticello—including the largest family, the Hemingses—reveal the strength of family bonds and importance of community activism.
"He was a Civil War hero"
Learn about all the participants in the Getting Word project and some of their ancestors from previous centuries: blacksmiths and farmers, educators and ministers, soldiers and suffragists.

Memory loss (amnesia) is unusual forgetfulness. You may not be able to remember new events, recall one or more memories of the past, or both.
Forgetfulness; Amnesia; Impaired memory; Loss of memory; Amnestic syndrome
Normal aging may cause some forgetfullness. It's normal to have some trouble learning new material, or needing more time to remember it.
However, normal aging does NOT lead to dramatic memory loss. Such memory loss is due to other diseases. Sometimes, memory loss may be seen with depression. It can be hard to tell the difference between memory loss and confusion due to depression.
Some types of memory loss may cause you to forget recent or new events, past or remote events, or both. You may forget memories from a single event, or all events.
Memory loss may cause you to have trouble learning new information or forming new memories.
The memory loss may be temporary (transient), or permanent.
Memory loss can be caused by many different things. To determine a cause, your doctor or nurse will ask if the problem came on suddenly or slowly.
Many areas of the brain help you create and retrieve memories. A problem in any of these areas can lead to memory loss.
Causes of memory loss include:
Alcohol or use of illicit drugs
Not enough oxygen to the brain (heart stopped, stopped breathing, complications from anesthesia)
Brain growths (caused by tumors or infection)
Brain infections such as Lyme disease, syphilis, or HIV/AIDS
A person with memory loss needs a lot of support. It helps to show them familiar objects, music, or photos.
Write down when the person should take any medication or complete any other important tasks. It is important to write it down.
If a person needs help with everyday tasks, or safety or nutrition is a concern, you may want to consider extended care facilities, such as a nursing home.
What to expect at your health care provider's office
The doctor or nurse will perform a physical exam and ask questions about the person's medical history and symptoms. This will almost always include asking questions of family members and friends. They should come to the appointment.
Medical history questions may include:
Can the person remember recent events (is there impaired short-term memory)?
Can the person remember events from further in the past (is there impaired long-term memory)?
Is there a loss of memory about events that occurred before a specific experience (anterograde amnesia)?
Is there a loss of memory about events that occurred soon after a specific experience (retrograde amnesia)?
Is there only a minimal loss of memory?
Does the person make up stories to cover gaps in memory (confabulation)?
Is the person suffering from low moods that impair concentration?
Has the memory loss been getting worse over years?
Has the memory loss been developing over weeks or months?
Is the memory loss present all the time or are there distinct episodes of amnesia?
If there are amnesia episodes, how long do they last?
Aggravating or triggering factors
Has there been a head injury in the recent past?
Has the person experienced an event that was emotionally traumatic?
Has there been a surgery or procedure requiring general anesthesia?
Does the person use alcohol? How much?
Does the person use illegal/illicit drugs? How much? What type?
What other symptoms does the person have?
Is the person confused or disoriented?
Can they independently eat, dress, and perform similar self-care activities?
Have they had seizures?
Tests that may be done include:
Blood tests for specific diseases that are suspected (such as low vitamin B12 or thyroid disease)
Kirshner HS. Approaches to intellectual and memory impairments. In: Gradley WG, Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J, eds. Neurology in Clinical Practice. 5th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2008:chap 6.
Luc Jasmin, MD, PhD, Department of Neurosurgery at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, and Department of Anatomy at UCSF, San Francisco, CA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David Zieve, MD, MHA, Medical Director, A.D.A.M., Health Solutions, Ebix, Inc.

The Bassoon is a woodwind instrument that was developed in the 16th century to add a stronger bass to the wind band ensemble. From the double reed family, the bassoon plays in the tenor range and below. It is known for its distinctive tone, wide range and agility.
Six main pieces make up the bassoon, including the reed. The bell, extends upward; the long joint, connects the bell and the boot; the boot (or butt) is at the bottom of the instrument and folds over on itself; the wing (or tenor) joint, extends from boot to bocal; and the bocal (or crook), attaches the wing joint to a reed.
Bassoon players must learn three different clefs: Bass (first and foremost), Tenor, and Treble. The range of the bassoon begins at B-flat and extends upward over three octaves (comparable to the E on the treble staff).

With a deer, you would never grab the bull by the horns.
For a few good reasons: Male deer are not called bulls, they are bucks, and they do not have horns, only antlers. Antlers and horns are two distinctly different accessories.
Horns are hollow and are held atop the head of members of the bovid family. Bovids include cows, sheep, bison and goats. Horns grow continuously year-round and are covered in keratin. They do not usually branch and are found on both male and female bovids.
Antlers, on the other hand, are temporary bones found on the heads of members of the cervid family. Cervids include deer, moose, elk, caribou and others. Antlers are temporary, often branching structures, growing generally on males for only part of the year. After eight months of growth and development, antlers will drop off the animal’s head. These cranial appendages are covered with a soft skin called velvet, which supplies blood, oxygen and nutrients to the growing antler bone. It is this velvet that will be rubbed against trees during mating, or rutting season in December.
It is not only form, but function that is different for these two toppers. Horns mainly protect the skull, while antlers are for communicating, to establish dominance, and for seducing members of the opposite sex. Seduction is accomplished by the antlers because the velvet covering and the animal’s head contain the highest concentration of oil and scent-producing glands that will attract the fairer sex.
Size matters when it comes to antlers. Bigger is better — a nice rack can be up to nine pounds and spread to 25 inches wide! The ladies, or does, will notice a sizable rack, which is the result of a combination of factors, including good nutrition, age and genetics. Bucks are headstrong and will challenge each other, engaging in shoving matches to impress the girls and dissuade the competition.
It is interesting to imagine the growth process of antlers, which start as nubs, grow to substantial size, and then fall off. Spring starts the antler growth cycle again. In April, longer days stimulate a buck’s hormones and his antlers will begin to develop. Antlers are the fastest growing bone known to science, increasing up to a half an inch per day. Contrast this with human hair, which takes a month to grown that same half inch. Antlers will grow until early fall, then the bone will die and the velvet dries up and falls or is rubbed off. Finally, the antlers will be dropped or shed.
Now is the time for “shed,” or antler hunting, a sport that requires no weapon. On-Island, of the cervids, one only finds deer so one only finds deer antlers, and only if you are lucky. Mid-December through mid-February is the time to look for shed antlers. Don’t be surprised if you don’t find any. Antlers, no matter how large, disappear quickly. They are speedily consumed by rodents, rabbits, squirrels and other animals that crave their high calcium and phosphorus and have the right incisor teeth to chew the tough bone. If you are fortunate and find an antler, look for teeth marks and evidence of nibbles.
Antler’s hard bone has been used for needles, weapons, arrowheads and even harpoons. In the 18th century, French naturalist Georges Louis Leclerc de Buffon hypothesized that antlers were made of vegetable matter or wood, which caused his doubters to raise questions about how antlers were attached to the deer’s head. Luckily, French zoologist Georges Cuvier ascertained their true nature a few years later.
Antler shape varies from animal to animal. They can be categorized as typical or nontypical and can have tines or points. Typical antlers are symmetrical and shoot up evenly from a beam, while a nontypical antler is asymmetrical with points or tines shooting out at different angles.
Antlers are a victory of form and strength, though they are heavy to haul around and cumbersome to carry. And while the well-endowed buck will likely get the girl, he will also have to contend with the ever present possibility that with his colossal crown, he could end up a terrific trophy.
Suzan Bellincampi is director of the Felix Neck Wildlife Sanctuary in Edgartown.

To really do justice to the entire world of traditional Japanese kites would take a larger website than this one!
Each different region in the country, called a Prefecture, tended to come up with it's own designs. This all happened during the Edo period from the early 1600s to the mid 1800s. The kites' names often refer to objects, folk heroes or creatures.
Besides the variety in decoration, it's amazing how unique Japanese kites are in terms of overall design. That is, the shape of the frame and sails.
Quaintly, the Japanese refer to the frame as the bones of the kite!
The big majority of them were, and in some cases still are, made from split bamboo for the spars and Washi paper for the sails. Washi might just be paper, but this hand-made mulberry-based product it is very strong and ideal for kites - as long as you don't get it wet!
I'm just going to focus on a couple of designs which have been much copied or adapted in the West. You are likely to see at least one of these types at any large kite festival around the world!
Apart from these 2 designs, I wouldn't be surprised if other traditional Japanese kites have been copied too, from time to time.
The shape of the Sode Dako looks somewhat like a Japanese kimono laid flat. In fact, 'Sode' means 'sleeves of a Kimono'.
Photo courtesy of Schnitzgeli.
Like some other Japanese kites, and many other Asian designs too, this one lends itself to having a 'hummer' strung across the upper horizontal spar. The hummer makes musical noises when aloft in fresh breezes. This feature doesn't seem to have been copied in the West though.
Traditionally, Sodes were built and flown to celebrate the birth of a son, and to ensure his future happiness and health.
In general, the larger Japanese kites need more complex bridle lines. At the small end of the scale, I've seen a child's paper Sode with no bridle at all - just a hole over the vertical spar allowing the flying line to be tied on directly!
Larger Sodes would work well with a 4-point bridle, with 2 lines from each horizontal spar. This helps to relieve the stress at the center of the horizontal spars, in fresher winds.
Most of the biggest Sodes seem to have 6-point bridles. That is, lines run from the center and each tip of both horizontal spars. This gives even more rigidity, allowing for the use of even lighter spars than would otherwise be possible. More rigidity also helps the kite to cope with stronger winds.
This example of a modern Sode kite is by Janneke Groen, who is well known for her artistic Sode kites. She specializes in appliqué and patchwork techniques. Janneke, who comes from The Netherlands has been putting her eye-catching flying works of art on show at kite festivals since the 1990s. It was at one of these festivals that Roy Reed took the picture opposite.
Modern Japanese kites like this one usually employ fiberglass or carbon fiber rods for spars, and use rip-stop nylon for the sails. The 4 narrow tails on this particular design help to keep it stable. However, I suspect they are very much a part of the kite's artistic concept!
Photo by Roy Reed.
An interesting addition is the bracing of the upper horizontal spar which I presume is there to improve the flying characteristics of the kite. That's the line going out from the nose to the tips. With a bit of ingenuity I guess it could be made to double as a pair of hummers! Tuned to 2 different notes perhaps...
Being a decent sized kite, Janneke has chosen to go with the full 6-point bridle. The bridle lines are clearly visible in the photo, and the bridle appears to be very long. Usually, with this kind of bridle, the 2 groups of three lines reduce to just 2 lines before being connected to the flying line itself.
Here's our own Sode design, which you can make for yourself ...
Photo courtesy of Jeff Attaway.
This design is so named because it originated in the region of Sanjo. It's more commonly referred to as the Rokkaku. Many non-Japanese abbreviate the name even further to just 'Rok'. The interesting thing about this design is how popular it has become in the West. There's an example of a non-traditional Rok up there in the photo.
The traditional Japanese kites were actually fighters, where people would try to knock each other out of the air by various devious means. Kite battles with the Rokkaku are still organized from time to time, all over the world.. In the West, versions of this kite are constructed with more modern materials, and when organized battles take place, the rules are different.
When it comes to bridling, there are some similarities to the Sode. Bridle lines are attached to various points along each horizontal spar. A common arrangement on these Japanese kites is the 4-point bridle which just has 2 lines on each horizontal spar.
The next step up would be the 6-point bridle as used on the big Sodes. In the case of the largest Roks flying in fresh wind, an extra line may even be attached to the vertical spar, at the very center. This prevents the vertical spar from bending under extreme air pressure.
Some commercially available kites have names. Like the one in the picture on the left, the LoonDance. How's that for an elaborate design! This modern Rok is screen-printed by hand, which still takes some time due to the number of colors. Other larger designs by this same company are hand-painted, which would add even more hours. Not to mention $s!
At about 1.5 meters tall (60 inches), this is a medium sized Rok. Thanks to Boreal Kites, of www.gothicdesign.ca, for permission to show that photo.
The materials are not exactly run-of-the-mill. The sail fabric is 3/4 oz. Contender Nylite, which I presume is a specialty nylon cloth, while the spars are spiral-wound epoxy tubing. Sounds exotic! According to the makers, this Rok likes winds of around 10 kph (6 mph), but can be adjusted to fly in much stronger breezes.
The photo shows a standard 4-point bridle being used.
Here's our own Rokkaku design, which you can make for yourself ...
If you would like a real insight into the world of traditional Japanese kites, perhaps the ultimate experience would be to visit the Kite Museum in Tokyo! Although there are only 3 rooms, they are crammed with approximately 3000 kites. These cover virtually every region of Japan. Apparently, the aroma of bamboo fills the air in this small but remarkable museum. Mmm, can't say my bamboo skewer spars smell like much, but then they are probably processed to death...
It's possible to buy Japanese kites from the museum. They have small and relatively inexpensive souvenir kites made from bamboo and paper. However, if you have money to burn, you could splash out on something bigger and even more exquisite, made by master craftsmen!
The museum is a 10-minute walk from the Yaesu central exit of the Tokyo station (Japan Railways), or a 1-minute walk from the C5 exit of the Nihonbashi subway station. The museum's address is:
Taimeiken Restaurant (5th Floor),
1-12-10 Nihonbashi, Chuoh-ku, Tokyo 103-0027
Never made a kite?
Child wants one?
Check out the...
MBK Beginner E-course
Watch it fly!
A closer view
Make all the Dowel kites, including the one above...
The ultimate kite-making resource, and naturally
much better value...
Are the e-books good?
Find out by trying...
'Simplest Dowel Kites'
(wait for cover page to appear)

Too many of our young people are caught up in conflicts every day that they do not know how to manage -- teasing, jealousy, and physical aggression. Juvenile delinquency and violence are symptoms of youth's inability to manage conflict in their lives. Teaching youth how to manage conflict in a productive way can help reduce incidents of violent behavior. Conflict resolution education is a beneficial component of a comprehensive violence prevention and intervention program in schools and communities.
Conflict resolution education encompasses problem solving in which the parties in dispute express their points of view, voice their interests, and find mutually acceptable solutions. Conflict resolution education programs help the parties recognize that while conflict happens all the time, people can learn new skills to deal with conflict in nonviolent ways. The programs that appear to be most effective are comprehensive and involve multiple components such as the problem-solving processes and principles of conflict resolution, the basics of effective communication and listening, critical and creative thinking, and an emphasis on personal responsibility and self-discipline.
Effective conflict resolution education programs can:
Four Common Strategies for Approaching Conflict Resolution
Experts identify four school-based conflict resolution strategies that can be replicated in other settings. These are commonly referred to as: (1) Peer Mediation, (2) Process Curriculum, (3) Peaceable Classrooms, and (4) Peaceable Schools. In all four approaches, conflict resolution education is viewed as giving youth nonviolent tools to deal with daily conflicts that can lead to self-destructive and violent behaviors. It is up to each local school district to decide how conflict resolution education will be integrated into its overall educational environment. The expectation is that when youth learn to recognize and constructively address what takes place before conflict or differences lead to violence, the incidence and intensity of that situation will diminish.
The program examples provided below empower young people with the processes and skills of conflict resolution. However, youth need to know that conflict resolution does not take precedence over adult responsibility to provide the final word in a variety of circumstances or situations. Conflict resolution has a place in the home, school, and community, but it can only supplement, not supplant, adult authority.
1) Peer Mediation Approach
Recognizing the importance of directly involving youth in conflict resolution, many schools and communities are using the Peer Mediation approach. Under this approach, specially trained student mediators work with their peers to resolve conflicts. Mediation programs reduce the use of traditional disciplinary actions such as suspension, detention, and expulsion; encourage effective problem solving; decrease the need for teacher involvement in student conflicts; and improve school climate.
An example of a Peer Mediation program is We Can Work It Out, developed by the National Institute for Citizenship Education in the Law and the National Crime Prevention Council. The program promotes mediation, negotiation, or other non-litigating methods as strategies to settle unresolved confrontations and fighting.
One Albuquerque elementary school principal reported, "We were having 100 to 150 fights every month on the playground before we started the New Mexico Center for Dispute Resolution's Mediation in the Schools Program. By the end of the school year, we were having maybe 10 (fights)." Other elementary schools using the same Peer Mediation approach to conflict resolution education reported that playground fighting had been reduced to such an extent that peer mediators found themselves out of a job.
Process Curriculum Approach
Teachers who devote a specific time -- a separate course, a distinct curriculum, or a daily lesson -- to the principles, foundation abilities, and problem-solving processes of conflict resolution are implementing the Process Curriculum approach. The Program for Young Negotiators, based on the Harvard Negotiation Project, is representative of this approach. Participating students, teachers, and administrators are taught how to use principled negotiation to achieve goals and resolve disputes. This type of negotiation helps disputants envision scenarios and generate options for achieving results that satisfy both sides.
In a North Carolina middle school with more than 700 students, conflict resolution education was initiated. The school used the Peace Foundation's Fighting Fair curriculum and a combination of components from various conflict resolution projects. After a school year, in-school suspensions decreased from 52 to 30 incidents (a 42-percent decrease), and out-of-school suspensions decreased from 40 incidents to 1 (a 97-percent decrease).
Peaceable Classroom Approach
The Peaceable Classroom approach integrates conflict resolution into the curriculum and daily management of the classroom. It uses the instructional methods of cooperative learning and "academic controversy." The Educators for Social Responsibility curriculum, Making Choices About Conflict, Security, and Peacemaking, is a peaceable classroom approach to conflict resolution. The program shows teachers how to integrate conflict resolution into the curriculum, classroom management, and discipline practices. It emphasizes opportunities to practice cooperation, appreciation of diversity, and caring and effective communication. Generally, peaceable classrooms are initiated on a teacher-by-teacher basis into the classroom setting and are the building blocks of the peaceable school.
Studies on the effectiveness of the Teaching Students To Be Peacemakers program, a Peaceable Classroom approach to conflict resolution, show that discipline problems requiring teacher management decreased by approximately 80 percent and referrals to the principal were reduced to zero.
Peaceable School Approach
The Peaceable School approach incorporates the above three approaches. This approach seeks to create schools where conflict resolution has been adopted by every member of the school community, from the crossing guard to the classroom teacher. A peaceable school promotes a climate that challenges youth and adults to believe and act on the understanding that a diverse, nonviolent society is a realistic goal.
In creating the Peaceable School Program of the Illinois Institute for Dispute Resolution, students are empowered with conflict resolution skills and strategies to regulate and control their own behavior. Conflict resolution is infused into the way business is conducted at the school between students, between students and teachers and other personnel, between teachers and administrators, and between parents and teachers and administrators.
In an evaluation of the Resolving Conflict Creatively Program in four multiethnic school districts in New York City, teachers of the Peaceable School approach to conflict resolution reported a 71-percent decrease in physical violence in the classroom and observed 66 percent less name calling and fewer verbal insults. Other changes in student behavior reported by the teachers included greater acceptance of differences, increased awareness and articulation of feelings, and a spontaneous use of conflict resolution skills throughout the school day in a variety of academic and nonacademic settings.
The effective conflict resolution education programs highlighted above have helped to improve the climate in school, community and juvenile justice settings by reducing the number of disruptive and violent acts in these settings; by decreasing the number of chronic school absences due to a fear of violence; by reducing the number of disciplinary referrals and suspensions; by increasing academic instruction during the school day; and by increasing the self-esteem and self-respect, as well as the personal responsibility and self-discipline of the young people involved in these programs.
Young people cannot be expected to promote and encourage the peaceful resolution of conflicts if they do not see conflict resolution principles and strategies being modeled by adults in all areas of their lives, such as in business, sports, entertainment, and personal relationships. Adults play a part in making the environment more peaceful by practicing nonviolent conflict resolution when minor or major disputes arise in their daily lives.
(Information provided by the U.S. Department of Education.)

China Service Medal
The China Service Medal was a relatively early entry into the hallowed halls of the medals of America when it was created by an Act of Congress in August of 1940. These US military medals were established to honor US Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard personnel who served ashore in China or were attached to vessels that operated in support of operations in China either between July 1937 and September of 1939, or between September of 1945 and April of 1957. Regulations permitted the wearing of a Bronze Service Star on these military medals and ribbons if a service member had performed duty during both periods of eligibility. These Navy medals are now considered obsolete, and are no longer issued by the US Navy. However, they can still be worn by Navy personnel who earned them during that period.
These Navy, Coast Guard and Marine Corps ribbons and medals are worn in the position directly below the Navy Expeditionary Medal, the Marine Corps Expeditionary Medal and the Coast Guard’s Medal for Humane Action; and are worn directly above the National Defense Service Medal in the general order of precedence that has been established for the proper display of all Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard military ribbons and medals. The China Service Medal is generally available as Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard decorations in the form of military medals, ribbons, and lapel pins. They can be worn as traditional slide-on medals, mini medals, and ribbons. While traditionalist may still prefer to purchase the traditional slide-on full size military medals, mini-medals, and slide-on military ribbons; the newer thin mini-medals, and ultra thin military ribbons commercial suppliers now provide have become extremely popular among up and coming military personnel who know how important it is to their career advancement to always maximize the neatness and smartness of their uniform appearance.

A Breed Apart :: The "Pit Bull" Debunked
by Lauren Jones Wenzel
|The term “Pit Bull” refers not to a single breed but a group of breeds, including the American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, the Staffordshire Bull Terrier, among others. Most originated from pairings of the ancestors we now call the Olde English Bulldogge and Terriers. Their breeders wanted to merge the muscular body and tenacity of the bulldog with the agility and “gameness” of terriers.|
Originally bred for blood sports like bull- and bear-baiting in Europe and North America, these dogs were trained to attack and immobilize the agitated animal and so were favored for their large, strong jaws and muscular necks and shoulders. When these sports were outlawed in the early 1800s, people began fighting the dogs, a sport more easily concealed from the authorities. Since then, their bad reputation, much inflated by the media, has made them the target of unfair discrimination, breed specific legislation (breed banning) and, thanks to their “tough dog” image, a favorite dog in the more illegal enterprises.
|The truth is that this highly intelligent, energetic, affectionate breed loves people. Pit Bulls were prized as wonderful family dogs in years past. In fact, they once had the moniker of “nanny dog” because of their wonderful demeanor with children.|
Most experts agree that today’s Pit Bull is a short-coated dog characterized by a wide skull, powerful jaws and a muscular, stocky body. But there is great variation in the Pit Bull’s appearance. Typically 35 to 65 pounds, some weigh as little as 25 pounds, while others tip the scales at 80 pounds or more. While some have bulkier frames and colossal skulls, others have leaner, more muscular bodies. All are strong and athletic. With their impressive stamina and staunch work ethic, Pit Bulls enjoy a variety of sports such as agility, disc dog competitions, flyball, freestyle and competitive obedience. They often excel in weight-pulling contests and schutzhund.
Pit Bulls are typically very friendly, even with strangers. They love people and thrive on attention and affection. Because of their terrier bloodlines, Pit Bulls have a high prey drive, meaning they will frequently chase and grab small animals. Since most terriers were bred for eradicating small rodents, Pit Bulls have a tendency to not get along with other animals, including dogs. This makes their early socialization with other animals especially important.
Pit Bulls also have a tendency to be easily aroused or over-excited and, once riled, it can be difficult for them to calm down, so adequate exercise and training are a must with these dogs. They are not the best choice for the first-time dog owner due to their strength and high energy level and, for the more rambunctious dogs, homes with older children are advised due to their energy and strength.
Because of their unfortunate reputation, owning a Pit Bull can be a greater responsibility than owning another breed. It is important that they be well-trained and socialized so they can be good ambassadors for their group. Yet, those dog guardians ready for the challenge and effort of Pit Bull ownership will find it to be one of the most loyal, loving, and wonderful companions on four legs.
|Did you know that Helen Keller, the famous blind and deaf author, activist, and lecturer of the early 1900s, owned a Pit Bull? Or that Petey from the popular series of the 1920s and 1930s, The Little Rascals, was also a Pit Bull? And during World War I and World War II, Pit Bulls were frequently used to carry messages on the battlefield.|

REFORM IN SPANISH EDUCATION: THE INSTITUCION LIBRE DE ENSENANZA
by Noel M. Valis
Paper presented to Thomas Woody Society, University of Pennsylvania, January 26, 1977
This document examines the development and influence of the Free Institute of Education (Institucion Libre de Ensenanza) and of its founder, Don Francisco Giner de los Rios, in late nineteenth century Spain. Founded in 1876 against a background of repression and reimposition of state-controlled education during the Bourbon Restoration the Institute was a private institution free of Church and State. Its intent was to create an alternative to the higher education system of official Spain, but due to financial problems, it evolved into an institution of primary and secondary education. Subject matter included traditional, State-required subjects, but also anthropology, technology, social sciences, economics, art, drawing, singing, and handwork--all generally neglected in State- and Church-run schools. Most radical were the innovations in art and physical education (stressing free inquiry, observation, and spontaneous criticism in the former, and development of the whole person in the latter) and in the institution of field trips, hiking, and nature observation. The use of textbooks was discouraged as much as possible, and examinations were regarded as producing mostly negative results. Emphasis was placed instead upon the creation of student notebooks that reflected the pupil's judgment and synthesis of materials. Don Francisco borrowed much from the French and English forms of education, and was influenced by Rousseau, Froebel, Pestalozzi, Krause, and Sanz Del Rio, the last of whom provided his ideal of reconciling all human facilities to produce an artistic taste, technical preparedness, spiritual elevation and an austere, moral sense of life. The Institute fell victim to the Civil War of 1936, but proved a pervasive influence in Spanish society to this day. (MB)
It has sometimes been said of Spanish philosophy, "What Spanish philosophy?" The same reproach might be directed at the non-existence of Spanish education. "There ain't no such animal," some might claim, forgetting for the moment the intellectual freedom and depth of thirteenth-century Toledo under the reign of Alfonso X, the Wise (El Sabio), and the splendor and revival of learning in the sixteenth-century Universities of Salamanca, Alcala and other institutions. What is mostly remembered, however, is the disheartening decline of Spanish education, ushered in by the rigidities, fears and intolerance of the Catholic Counter-Reformation, of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Spain.
But this view of education in Spain, of necessity simplified, would not be complete without mention of the establishment and significance of the Instititucion Libre de Ensenanza, in English, the Free Institution/Institute of Education. In order to understand more clearly the Institute's impact on Spanish society, I will review very quickly some of the historical background to its founding in 1876.
A broad overview of nineteenth-century Spain reveals to us that the "lack of civility" among Spaniards, which reached such extreme proportions during the 1936-30 Civil War, had its roots in the last century. Civil war, frequent military uprisings in the form of "pronunciamientos," and dissension everywhere created an ambience of unease and fragmentation within Spanish society. Historians talk of "Las dos Espanas," the "two Spains," that is, the liberal, progressive side as opposed to the traditional, sometimes reactionary side of the country. It is probably more accurate, however, to talk of the many Spains.
To disagree was the Spaniard's right -- no, his duty to himself, to his own proud sense of individuality and dignity. A solution imposed from above, from the State, seemed, in many cases, the only solution when there were problems, and there were many -- economic, political, religious. The problem of Spanish education was only of several, and it too came to be subsumed into the more general and overriding conflict of State versus Individual, of Authority vs. Freedom. Reconciling such absolutes frequently failed; worse still, the distinction between philosophy and ideology, that is, between the search for truth and the molding, frequent distorting of existential reality to one's own conception of it, this distinction would too often become blurred in the disputes and violence of nineteenth-century Spain. Tempers rose, passions were unleashed, ideologies reigned supreme, and somewhere in the shuffle, clarity of vision and truth were lost.
This split in Spanish society in part gave birth to the Free Institute of Education. Specifically, we must look to the years 1868 and 1874 to explain how the Institute came into being. The date 1868 conjures up one outstanding event in modern Spanish history: the overthrow of the reigning Bourbon monarch, Isabel II, an action which is termed the Glorious Revolution of 1868. It was a somewhat qualified victory for the liberal cause in Spain since the end result was to bring confusion, instability, bitterness, and finally, in 1874, the reestablishment of another Bourbon king, Isabel's son, Alfonso XII. This period, called the Restoration (Restauracion) in Spain, also reinstated the State-controlled, religiously oriented educational system which the Revolution of 1868 had attempted to change. This move and the specific action which the Minister in charge of education, Manuel de Orovio, brought against the future founder of the Institute, Francisco Giner de los Rios, would be the direct and immediate causes of the Institute's creation.
SPANISH EDUCATION: OVERVIEW
Before going into a more detailed explanation of the origins of the Institute, I think a brief look at the state of Spanish education prior to 1876 would be useful. In my opening statement, I mentioned two high points in the history of Spanish education: the medieval center of learning in Toledo and the sixteenth-century Universities of Salamanca and Alcala de Henares. Both periods were characterized by a high enthusiasm for learning and considerable freedom in which to do it. In Toledo, Jews, Moors and Christians collaborated together in a spirit of respect and tolerance. In the first half of the sixteenth century, students and professors at Salamanca, Alcala and other universities constituted, within an amazing diversity of university modes of existence, an entity independent of the strictures and authority of the State. Yet by the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, learning in Spain seemed to have ceased. For example, at the University of Salamanca, the Chair for Mathematics and Astrology -- the title speaks for itself, I think -- remained vacant for thirtyyears until it was finally filled in 1726.
What happened? In brief: The Counter-Reformation. This is obviously a great simplification of the causes of Spain's decadence in education and elsewhere. But certainly Spain's withdrawal and increasing isolation from the rest of Europe from the middle of the sixteenth century on explains in part the origins of stagnation in her schools and universities. In 1559 Philip II forbade study in foreign universities; shortly before that, he banned the importing of books from abroad. The additional power of the Inquisition to safeguard orthodoxy among Spaniards and weed out the impure and heretical elements must also be taken into account. And finally, as the historian Americo Castro has pointed out, Spaniards became reluctant to demonstrate intellectual powers and curiosity for fear of being taken for a Jew. Spanish Jews were known for their interest in intellectual matters. And nobody wanted to deal with the Inquisition.
To control the inner life and content of the universities and other schools the government stepped in so that by the nineteenth century Spanish schools, particularly the Universities, to quote Salvador Madariaga, "were more Government establishments for the granting of official diplomas" (p. 75, Spain, N.Y., 1943). He goes on to say that "in a sense all universities tend fatally to become degree factories. But in Spain ... they were nothing else."
Schooling on all levels were plagued by unimaginative, and stiff, unbending teaching, bad textbooks, long hours of routine and frequent utter boredom, and sometimes even brutalization. Memorization and recitation were the chief pedagogic tools. The first third of the last century also brought in more imitation of French manners and customs, certainly not the first instance of French influence on Spanish education. Eighteenth-century Spain had already adopted Gallic centralization of schooling. The critic Mariano Jose de Larra describes the mania of copying, badly, I might add, French mores among the Spanish middle classes and well-to-do. The narrator of "El casarse pronto y mal" writes that his sister became enamored of French customs and from then on, "bread was no longer bread (pan), nor wine, wine (vino)." "Suffice it to say," continues Larra in this ironic vein,
that my sister adopted the ideas of the period; but as this second education was as shallow and superficial as the first (her Spanish upbringing), and as that weak segment of humanity never knows how not to go to extremes, she suddenly jumped from the Christian Year of Our Lord 18__ to the era of Pigault Lebrun (a frivolous, sometimes scandalous French novelist) and left off going to Mass and devotions, without knowing in the least why she did so, why she used to go in the first place. She said that her son could be educated in whatever manner it suited him; that he could read without order or method whatever books fell into his hands; and God knows what other things she said about ignorance and fanaticism, reason and enlightenment, adding that religion was a social contract into which only idiots entered in good faith and that the boy didn't need religion to be good; that the terms, father and mother (padre y madre) were lower-class, and that one should treat one's papa and mama familiarly with the tu form of address because there is no friendship like that which unites parents to their children. (Articulos de Costumbres, Madrid,  1965).
A writer of a later period, Jose Maria de Pereda retains this image of his school days in the 1840's:
The chill of death, the obscurity of a dungeon, the stench of grottoes, the unhappiness, affliction and pain of torture permeated the classroom ... Virgil and Dante, so clever in depicting hell and torment, would have been at wit's end to describe those images of school which are engraved in my memory for the rest of my life ... I believed myself cut off from the refuge of my family and the protection of the State; I heard the swish of the cane and the complaints of the victims, and the lessons were very long, and there were no excuses for not knowing them; and not knowing them meant caning and mockery, which also hurt; and confinement, fisticuffs, whipping, and the ignominy of all these things. Who is the brave soul who could truly paint such scenes if the worst of it was what the spirit felt and not what the eyes saw or the flesh suffered? (Esbozos y rasgunos, "Mas reminiscencias," Obras completas, v. 1, Madrid,  1959, p. 1226).
He then goes on to say that "one had to know the lesson literally (al pie de la letra"), word for word. One misplaced word, one substitute, was enough to merit punishment." (p. 1226). Why, one asks, was this so? Pereda explains that the professor "taught the way he had been taught: by blows. Little by little the habit became part of his nature. The want of intellect, the extreme devotion to the profession, the traditions of the classroom and the educational system did the rest." (p. 1232).
And finally, here is the testimony of yet another writer, the novelist Benito Perez Galdos, who describes Spanish education in the 1860's:
The class lasted hours and hours ... Never was there a more repugnant nightmare, fashioned out of horrible aberrations which were called Arithmetic, Grammar or Ecclesiastical History ... Around the axis of boredom revolved such grave problems as syntax, the rule of three, the sons of Jacob, all confounded in the common hue of pain, all tinted with loathing ... (El Doctor Centeno, Obras completas, v. 4, Madrid, p. 1319).
Pereda was a conservative, Galdos a liberal -- yet both concur that the Spanish educational system was wretched. Thus, when liberals and progressives took control in 1868, one of their first priorities was educational reform. They declared, first of all, the principle of freedom of education and teaching. The instability and factionalism of the liberal regime, however, precluded any lasting reforms in education. The conservative return to power in 1874 reestablished the right of the State to dictate to schools the textbooks to be used and the curriculum to be followed. In addition, Orovio, the Minister in charge of education, sent out to the Directors (or Rectores) of the Universities a circular in which he recommended that no religious doctrines inimical to those held by the State be taught and that no political ideas be expressed to the detriment of the king's person or the constitutional monarchy then in power. The circular also stated that action would be taken against any professor who so indulges in such political or religious meditations -- i.e., expulsion from the University. The Minister's recommendations were no mere recommendations.
The result of all this was the removal of several professors from their faculty chairs. Among them was the future founder of the Institute, Francisco Giner de los Rios. For not adhering to the State's demands, he was arrested in March 1875, at 4:00 in the morning, and spent four months confinement until he was finally expelled from the University.
The principle in question was clearly one of academic freedom. The State, however, saw the "university question" ("cuestion universitaria") from another angle: that is, the University and its Faculties were no more than instruments of the government's policies and, therefore, were obligated to conform to the State's instructions and directives. The professors were, in effect, civil servants (and still are today).
This, then, is the historical and educational background to the founding of the Institucion Libre de Ensenanza, the Institute, in 1876.
THE INSTITUCION LIBRE DE ENSENANZA
Perhaps the most significant point to be made about the Institute's existence is the profound and far-reaching, if diffuse, influence of its founder, Francisco Giner de los Rios, a professor of philosophy of law at the University of Madrid. It was largely Don Francisco's attractive and vibrant personality which held the Institute together and proved to be the Prime Mover of the school. All the accounts of Don Francisco by friends, former students, disciplines, and fellow professors stress the very personal and individual effect of the man. This is not to deny the cogency of his ideas and methods of teaching but simply to make clear that, with Don Francisco, abstractions were made concrete in his very person; that is, through him and his relations with men and women, he incarnated his own beliefs. One friend had this to say about him as a teacher at the time of his death in 1915:
What was the secret of his teaching? Did he reveal anything new? Or was it that everything was transformed at the touch of his powerful creative imagination?
The secret lay as much in the form as in the substance.
As a teacher, he brought us something that was the complete opposite of the old methods; and he discouraged the craze for oratory which has been so damaging to education in Spain. In his lectures at the University or at the Institution, he only aimed at one thing: to shake the pupil out of his torpor, stir him up to independent investigation, to working the thing out by himself; and above all he recommended games, art, the country.
As an educationist he created a complete system of social education, which had for its axis the child, the citizen, the man as he would like to see him, healthy in mind and body, and working for a Spain that was strong and dignified and which must one day rise again. (J.B. Trend, Origins of Modern Spain, N.Y. 1934, p. 99).
Or as another writer put it: "He gave us our conception of the universe and of the way to peel an orange." (p. 103).
What was Don Francisco's creation, the Institute, like and what were its educational and philosophical origins? How did Don Francisco and his disciples "make men," "hacer hombres," the overriding goal of the Institute? As J.B. Trend, Rafael Altamira, and others have noted, Don Francisco Giner believed that the most pressing problem of Spain was the problem of education. He, like the literary Generation of 1898, was obsessed -- and rightly so -- with the question of Spain's decadence, and the vital necessity for her regeneration. And he took the now classic position of the nineteenth-century liberal that through education lay the country's revitalization. It must be clearly understood that Don Francisco's efforts were those of a minority and directed toward a minority. It was not mass education, although the effects of the Institute certainly were to reach public education throughout Spain in the twentieth century.
First and most important, the Institute was created as a private institution, independent of both Church and State. I don't think it is necessary to do more than mention here the historic interdependence of Church and State in Spain. The credo of the Institute, which appeared regularly on the masthead of its publication, the Bulletin of the Free Institute of Education (El Boletin de la Institucion Libre de Ensenanza) was as follows:
The Free Institute of Education is completely opposed to religious, philosophical and political sectarianism, proclaiming only the principle of liberty and the inviolability of science and the concomitant independence of scientific research and explanation, with regard to any other authority than that of the conscience itself of the Professor, who is alone responsible for his ideas. (cited by A. Jimenez-Landi, "Don Francisco Giner de los Rios y la Institucion Libre de Ensenanza," Revista Hispanica Moderna, v. 25, nos. 1, 2, 1959, p. 16).
Because Spain's educational history had been one of bickering and divisiveness between the demands of the State and the private sector, and conflict between the precepts of the Church and needs of Science, with Religion usually dominating over Science, Don Francisco abhorred dogmatic, closed positions. He fervently believed in tolerance. It was not, however, mere intellectual benevolence which motivated Don Francisco. Rather, it was an ethical, moral stance, a way of life, which he wanted to instill in his pupils, the "Institutionists."
A follower of Giner de los Rios, Jose Castillejo, has written that, for Don Francisco, "the two greatest forces in education are: the personality of the teacher and the social atmosphere and surroundings of the school" (Wars of Ideas in Spain, London, 1937, p. 97). We have already seen in the magnetic power of Don Francisco's teaching itself the importance of the teacher's personality. What about the ambience of the school?
Here, one sees right away to what extent Don Francisco and his disciples felt compelled to move away from the current, i.e., antiquated and rigid teaching methods and atmosphere of both public and private schools in Spain. First, the classroom should be informal, akin to familial surroundings. The teacher should not merely dictate or lecture, but rather converse, using whatever approach or combination of approaches worked best, starting with the Socratic dialogue. No one method was to be used, to the exclusion of all others. The teacher was a guide, the pupils a family. A small family. Classes were to be kept small. And coeducational (Primary and secondary education in Spain today is not coeducational.) Cordiality and the spirit of discovery were the key words at the Institute. Don Francisco aimed at dispelling not only the fear and horror of school, such as we have seen in Pereda's reminiscences, but the passivity with which most students received their education.
The original intent of the Institute was to create an alternative to the higher education of official Spain, but the desire was not to be met. It was quickly found to be beyond the resources of the Institute which suffered from chronic insufficiency of funds from its inception. Instead, the school evolved into an institution of primary and secondary education. Since most students entering a Spanish university were ill-prepared to meet its demands, the "Institutionists" felt that a solid intellectual, moral, physical and spiritual background given in the primary and secondary levels of education was an a priori necessity.
What was taught at the Institute besides the traditional subjects required by the State ___ curriculum included Anthropology, Technology, Social Sciences, Economics, Art, Drawing, Singing, and Handwork. Most of these subjects were generally neglected in State and Church-run schools of the period.
Most remembered and most significant are the innovations carried out in the arts and in physical education, and the frequent excursions. First, art. "Institutionists," for the most part, tried to avoid systematic and highly structured courses in art and art history. Instead, they emphasized such activities as excursions to historical monuments and places and visits to museums. Such an unorthodox procedure was unheard-of in nineteenth-century Spain. Rather than mere lessons, the Institute stressed the actual, vivid experiencing of art as much as possible. Like the literary generation of 1898, they also, in a sense, rediscovered Spain's cultural heritage, by extolling the value of Spanish folklore, architecture and painting. It was, for example, a disciple of Don Francisco, Manuel de Cossio, who rediscovered the forgotten and neglected El Greco for Spaniards and the rest of the world.
One of the most delightful illustrations of the Institute's approach to art is to be found in Don Francisco's essay on "Spontaneous Criticism by Children of the Fine Arts." In it he describes how a group of children of twelve and fourteen years of age, conducted by him one day to a museum, learned to form their own artistic sensibilities and judgments by comparing two pieces of sculpture, one by Donatello and the other by Lucas de la Robbia. On this occasion, Don Francisco did not even attempt to point out the obvious differences in style, expression and composition in the two sculptures. He simply let the children use their own powers of observation, uninfluenced by any previous explanations or prejudices. Thus, through observation, they were able to define the work.
The second and more difficult problem, says Don Francisco, was one of judgment. Which was the better sculpture? "I discovered," he writes, "a very curious phenomenon: there was a unanimous explosion in favor of Lucas de la Robbia. They stumbled over their words in their rush to tell me that from the very first de la Robbia had seemed to them so superior that they could scarcely understand why there should be any doubt; that sweetness, that mystical expression, that softness, that elegance, that repose. How could anyone compare this divine object with the coarse rawness and the hard, unbecoming and massive forms of Donatello? Why, it was almost a caricature of a sculpture! 'And Donatello is a sculptor with a great reputation!' they told me, almost aggressively. You can imagine how I resisted giving them the least sign of disagreement with this vehemently-held point of view, nor did I even invite them to study more carefully both works before pronouncing an opinion. Showing nothing but the most rigorous neutrality and even indifference, I began to look around rather distractedly, now at one piece, now at another. They did the same. After a little while, and spontaneously, there occurred a certain attenuation in the crudeness of their first judgment: 'No, I wouldn't say that it was exactly grotesque (in Spanish, 'un mamarracho').' 'There's a certain strength; the composition has a certain vigor.' 'If you put the piece in the right place, it wouldn't seem so bulky, so massive ...' And then: 'You know, if you really look hard at these things of Donatello, they're very manly; de la Robbia seems a little effeminate,' etc., etc. Finally, why prolong it? The gradual reversal of opinion in favor of Donatello reached the point of one child saying: 'There must be other works of Lucas de la Robbia which deserve his fame.' And it was precisely the very boy who had first placed in doubt the merits of Donatello's own reputation." ("Antologia," Revista Hispanica Moderna, v. 25, nos, 1, 2, 1959, pp. 132-133).
A second innovation which I mentioned before was the approach to physical education. Rather than the routine and boredom of calisthenics, directed toward a military goal of physical competence, the Institute stressed games, games which were to form character. The use of games as an ethical force is, of course, an educational practice borrowed from the public schools of England. Anyone who has read Kipling's Stalky and Company or the early school novels of P. G. Wodehouse will have a good idea of what I am referring to.
But, for Don Francisco, playing cricket and football also signified that the whole person was being educated. Intellectual formation alone was lopsided. To provide an integral education required an awareness and use of one's own body. Mere discreet walks, in carefully monitored lines, which was the usual practice and extent of physical exercise in other schools, were simply inadequate.
The third point of the Institute's educational program were the excursions out to the countryside. This also was unheard-of in the last century of Spain. Long walks and mountain climbing simply were not done. In Don Francisco's time, people shut all their windows tight, never letting in fresh air; they frequented taverns and cafes, and sometimes strolled casually at night for a short walk along a busy thoroughfare, but almost never thought exploring the countryside an exhilarating occupation. Again, like the Generation of 1898, Don Francisco and his Institute discovered the Spanish countryside. Before that, almost no one seems to have appreciated it. Realist novelists, for example, rarely describe Nature; even the Spanish Romanticists evidence little sensitivity toward Nature.
The idea, which was brought back from Paris in 1878 by one of the Institute's professors, was, like the introduction of games, imported from abroad and adapted to Spanish circumstances. Excursions developed the intellectual and physical capabilities of the pupil; more important, for Don Francisco, they allowed one to enter into communion with Nature, to feel oneself as part of a Whole.
I would like to touch briefly on two other aspects of the Institute's educational program; the use of textbooks and examinations. Don Francisco discouraged the use of textbooks; to a great extent, he did so as a reaction to the wretched official textbooks forced on students at State-and Church-run schools. Instead, he preferred the creation of student notebooks which reflected the child's own judgments and synthesis of the material, and which were carefully checked and read by the teachers. Likewise, Don Francisco felt that examinations brought mostly negative results. Examinations in other schools were simply the means to acquire a degree; and stressed only the student's ability to memorize and to repeat exactly what the Professor dictated in class.
Respect for the freedom of the child is at the heart of the Institute's teaching. The intuitive method in education, which goes back to Jacques Rousseau, by way of Froebel and Pestalozzi, was practiced by the Institute. This meant the substitution of restraint, obligation, and mechanical behavior by personal effort, spontaneity, and school work which had become ___ and attractive.
These then, were the main points of the Institute's program. It should be noted that the educational reform undertaken by the Institute was not the first instance of attempts to improve education in Spain; and that the Institute's pedagogy depended, to a large extent, on influences from abroad which were modified to suit the Spanish temperament. The pedagogical efforts of [Gaspar Melchor de] Jovellanos in the eighteenth century and the short-lived Pestalozzian schools of the early nineteenth are but two examples of such attempts at educational improvement in Spain. With regard to the Institute's educational philosophy, we have already seen that the "Institutionists" borrowed from both England and France. And a survey of the Institute's publications reveals that Don Francisco and his colleagues were quite aware of the pedagogical approaches of Pestalozzi and Froebel.
But perhaps the most significant, if somewhat vague, influence on the Institute is derived from the importation of the ideas of an obscure, second-rate German philosopher by name of Christian Friedrich Krause by a then equally obscure Spanish professor, Julian Sanz del Rio. This is not the place to examine the abstruse metaphysics of Krause or of Sanz del Reio's adaptation of it, but simply to state that Sanz del Rio's profoundly ethical work, Humanity's Ideal for Life strongly influenced Francisco Giner de los Rios and many other Spanish intellectuals who, during the 1860's and 70's, called themselves Krausistas. The Krausist tendency and ideal to create a world increasingly more unified, harmonious and complete is translated in pedagogical terms into the attempt to reconcile all the faculties of the human being, to develop the whole personality of the individual so that he or she might cultivate not only an artistic taste and sensibility, but a technical preparation, spiritual elevation, and an austere, moral sense of life.
Despite the criticisms leveled against Don Francisco and his Institute of being anti-religious, the Institute did inculcate a spiritual leaning in its students without favoring any particular orthodox religious belief. Don Francisco himself was a boliovor. Jose Castillejo writes that "Ginor ... following Sanz del Rio, believed that schools need a religious spirit, to lift up the minds of children towards a universal order of the world, a supreme ideal of life and a harmony among men and between humanity and Nature. Without that spirit education is dead and dry" (Wars of Ideas in Spain, p. 100). One could say, in brief, that the whole of the Institute's education, the entire atmosphere of the Institute, was permeated with this spiritualization of man and the universe.
It does not take too much imagination to see that the Institute would not be without enemies. The ideological dichotomy between left and right, progressive and traditionalist, in Spain immediately polarized the significance of the Institute. It was the product of the Devil for some; the only hope and salvation in Spain for others. The Institute itself fell, one more victim, to the ravages of Spain's Civil War in 1936. Yet, looked at dispassionately, the Institute's openness to ideas and influences from the rest of Europe, its undogmatic approach to education and to life itself, could not help but bring a breath of fresh air to the closed and narrow society of nineteenth-century Spain. If it perhaps erred too much in the direction of intellectual anarchy and placed too much confidence in the innate goodness of man, the Institute's efforts at raising the moral and intellectual level of Spaniards became an all-pervasive influence in many institutions, both public and private, in government circles, in business. The Institute was "much more than a school." It was an atmosphere of intellectual and moral enlightenment; and a belief in the regeneration of Spain.

Below are the first 10 and last 10 pages of uncorrected machine-read text (when available) of this chapter, followed by the top 30 algorithmically extracted key phrases from the chapter as a whole.
Intended to provide our own search engines and external engines with highly rich, chapter-representative searchable text on the opening pages of each chapter. Because it is UNCORRECTED material, please consider the following text as a useful but insufficient proxy for the authoritative book pages.
Do not use for reproduction, copying, pasting, or reading; exclusively for search engines.
OCR for page 1
Summary A NEW PERSPECTIVE Hazards of modern life surround us and so, too, does commu- nication about the risks of those hazards. News reports describe such hazards as pollutants in the air and in drinking water, pes- ticide residues in food, threats from radiation and toxic chemicals, and ATDS. Government and industry also send out messages about hazards and their risks, sometimes directly to the populace but more often through intermediaries, such as the print and broadcast media. Risk messages are difficult to formulate in ways that are accurate, clear, and not rn~sTeading. One reads, for example, that "radon risk can equal or exceed the 2%o risk of death in an auto accident, . . . for anyone who lives 20 years at levels exceeding about 25 picocuries per liter" (Kerr, 1988~. This statement places an unfamiliar risk (radon exposure in homes) in juxtaposition to a more familiar risk (death in an auto accident), which may help people understand the magnitude of this unfamiliar risk. But this simple comparison may be misleading because it does not specify the respective levels of exposure, leaves out potentially relevant nonlethal consequences, and uses language (picocuries per liter) unfamiliar to most people. This report addresses these and other problems confronting risk communication. 1
OCR for page 2
2 IMPROVING RISK COMMUNICATION Risk messages can be controversial for many reasons. The haz- ards they describe are often themselves centers of controversy. Fre- quently, there is enough uncertainty in the underlying knowledge to allow different experts to draw contradictory conclusions. Experts are frequently accused of hiding their subjective preferences behind technical jargon and complex, so-called objective analyses. Often a message that is precise and accurate must be so complex that only an expert can understand it. Messages that nonexperts can under- stand necessarily present selected information and are thus subject to challenge as being inaccurate, incomplete, or manipulative. In the past the term risk communication has commonly been thought of as consisting only of one-way messages from experts to nonexperts. In this report the Committee on Risk Perception and Communication takes a different perspective. Because much of the controversy seems to center on the content of specific messages, it was tempting to proceed along the lines of many previous discussions about risk communication and concentrate on message design. We found a focus on one-way messages too limiting, however. Instead, we make a crucial distinction between risk messages and the risk communication process. We see risk communication as an interactive process of exchange of information and opinion among individuals, groups, and institutions. When risk communication is viewed in this way, significant, though perhaps less obvious, underlying problems can be better discerned and treated. We view success in risk communication in a different way also. Some take the position that risk communication is successful when recipients accept the views or arguments of the communicator. We construe risk communication to be successful to the extent that it raises the level of understanding of relevant issues or actions for those involved and satisfies them that they are adequately informed within the limits of available knowledge. Finally, it should be noted that one of the most difficult issues we faced concerned the extent to which public officials in a demo- cratic society should attempt to influence individuals-that is, to go beyond merely informing them concerning risks and such risk- reducing actions as quitting smoking. Government officials must be accountable for their decisions and will likely find their efforts to influence contested if they stray from accepted scientific views or if they challenge popular consensus. A public official should be aware of the political risks and of the legitimate constraints placed upon government in advocacy. Procedural strategies such as independent
OCR for page 3
SUMMARY 3 review processes can be used to determine the appropriateness of the use of influencing techniques. Where an unusually strong degree of advocacy seems warranted, officials should seek legitimization of such actions through the democratic process. COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT RISE COMMUNICATION Several important misconceptions need to be dispelled before the real problems of risk communication can be addressed. Con- trary to what some think, there is no single overriding problem and thus no simple way of making risk communication easy. Risk mes- sages necessarily compress technical information, which can lead to misunderstanding, confusion, and distrust. Many people including some scientists, decision makers, and members of the public-have unrealistic expectations about what can be accomplished by risk communication. For example, it is mistaken to expect improved risk communication to always reduce conflict and smooth risk management. Risk management decisions that benefit some citizens can harm others. In addition, people do not all share common interests and values, so better understanding may not lead to consensus about controversial issues or to uniform personal behavior. But even though good risk communication cannot always be expected to improve a situation, poor risk communication will nearly always make it worse. It is also mistaken to think, as some do, that if people understood and used risk comparisons it would be easy for them to make decisions. Comparing risks can help people comprehend the unfamiliar magnitudes associated with risks, but risk comparison alone cannot establish levels of acceptable risk or ensure systematic minimization of risk. Factors other than the level of risk-such as the voluntariness of exposure to the hazard and the degree of dread associated with the consequences must be considered in determining the acceptability of risk associated with a particular activity or phenomenon. Some risk communication problems derive from mistaken beliefs about scientific research on the nature of how risks are assessed and managed and on risk communication itself. Scientific information, for example, cannot be expected to resolve all important risk issues. All too often research that would answer the question has not been done or the results are disputed. Although a great deal of research has been done on the dissemination and preparation of risk messages,
OCR for page 4
4 IMPROVING RISK COMMUNICATION there has been much less attention devoted to the risk communication process. In addition, even when valid scientific data are available, experts are unlikely to agree completely about the meaning of these data for risk management decisions. Finally, it is unrealistic to expect easy identification and understanding of the values, preferences, and information needs of the intended recipients of risk messages. Other misconceptions involve stereotypes about the way inter- mediaries and recipients react to risk messages. It is mistaken, for example, to view journalists and the media always as significant, independent causes of problems in risk communication. Rather, the problem is often at the interface between science and journalism. Both sides need to better understand the pressures and constraints of the other instead of complaining about the sometimes disappointing results. Scientists and risk managers should recognize the importance of the part journalists play in identifying disputes and maintaining the flow of information during resolution of conflicts; journalists need to understand how to frame the technical and social dimensions of risk issues. It is also important to recognize the differences between the broadcast ant! the print media and between the national and the regional or local press corps. Finally, even though most people prefer simplicity to complex- ity, it is mistaken to expect the public to want simple, cut-and-dried answers as to what to do in every case. The public is not homoge- neous. People diner in the degree to which they exercise control over exposure to hazards or remediation of undesirable consequences, the importance they attach to various consequences, and their tendency to be risk averse or risk seeking. Often at least part of the public seeks considerable information about the risks they face. PROBLEMS OF RISK COMMUNICATION We distinguish two major types of problems in risk communica- tion. Problems deriving from institutional and political systems are problems for which little can be done beyond trying to understand them by those involved in risk communication. Nevertheless, these problems can have a considerable impact on actions and events. Problems of risk communicators and recipients can be addressed more directly and are therefore more amenable to improvement or solution.
OCR for page 5
SUMMARY 5 Problems Deriving Mom the Institutional and Political Systems Several kinds of legal considerations, including statutory man- dates, liability, and informed consent and "right-to-know" require- ments, influence the options available to risk managers and thus the content of their risk messages. These considerations generally either limit the possible responses to the risk in question or require that certain actions be taken in given circumstances. For example, some- times statutes require consideration of certain factors (the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act explicitly includes con- sideration of economic benefits) or the exclusion of others (the Clean Water Act specifies that the best available technology should be used regardless of the financial burden imposed). Although not necessar- ily problems as such, these considerations often constitute important influences on risk messages and risk communication processes. It is often difficult to understand why risk messages appear as they do without consideration of these factors. Communicating with citizens about risks can increase their desire to participate in or otherwise influence decisions about the control of those risks, thereby making risk management even more cumber- some. The interests of citizens and their motivation to participate in the political process can introduce difficult challenges when the implementation of risk control measures is necessarily decentralized and local preferences (generally to avoid exposure to a particular risk) preclude solutions in the broader interest. Many hazardous waste facilities operate under these pressures. Divided authority, not only among Congress, the executive branch, and the courts at the federal level but also among federal, state, and local or regional jurisdictions, creates incentives for each actor to gain as much leverage as possible from the limited portion he or she controls. Such fragmentation makes communicating about risks harder because it makes government regulation and risk reduc- tion programs more complex and makes it more difficult to determine who is responsible for the eventual outcomes. Government and industry spend large amounts of money on research, and thus their concerns are usually well reflected in the information developed by that research. Individuals and citizens' groups do not usually have the financial resources to fund research and thus do not enjoy this sort of access to information and influence over its generation. If a group of people that a risk corr~municator is trying to reach feels that the system for generating information relied
OCR for page 6
6 IMPROVING RISK COMMUNICATION upon by that source does not consider the group's concerns, it may reject the information from that source as a basis for decisions about risks. It is reasonable to speculate that this may, in part, explain why it is so difficult to affect young people's attitudes and behavior about drugs and the AIDS epidemic the information presented is based on facts that they do not consider very important in the face of their immediate concerns of peer pressure and personal image. There also may be systematic biases in the provision of informa- tion. Those most strongly motivated to communicate about risk are often also those with the ' strongest interest in the decision. When- ever a personal or social decision affects interested groups or organi- zations, conflicting messages reflecting the interests of those groups or organizations may be expected. The U.S. Environmental Protec- tion Agency administrator's statement in 1984 that EDB (ethylene dibromide)'contamination was a Tong-term health problem being ade- quately handled by tolerance guidelines, for example, was in the news at about the same time that public health officials in Massachusetts and Florida were removing grain products with EDB contamination from grocery store shelves. Experts from the food industry joined in, downplaying the risks, while scientists from environmental groups criticized the government's inaction. The beliefs, predispositions, and interests of risk communicators and the groups they represent create incentives to slant, or even distort or misrepresent, informa- tion. This can skew messages in many different directions on the same Issue. Problems of Risk Communicators and Recipients The problems encountered by the sources and recipients of risk messages center on the following topics: establishing and recognizing credibility, making the messages understandable, preparing messages in an emergency, capturing and focusing attention, and getting in- formation. Lack of credibility alters the communication process by adding distrust and acrimony. The most important factors affecting the credibility of a source and its messages relate to the accuracy of the messages and the legitimacy of the process by which the contents were determined, as perceived by the recipients. Recipients' views about the accuracy of a message are adversely affected by (1) real or perceived advocacy by the source of a position in the message that is not consistent with a careful assessment of the facts; (2)
OCR for page 7
SUMMARY 7 a reputation for deceit, misrepresentation, or coercion on the part , ~ . positions taken by the source that do not support the current message; (4) self-serving framing of information in the message; (5) contradictory messages from other credible sources; and (6) actual or perceived professional incompetence or impropriety on the part of the source. The perceived legitimacy of the process by which the contents of a message were determined depends on (1) the legal standing of the source with respect to the risks addressed; (2) the justification provided for the communication program; (3) the access afforded affected parties to the decision-making process; and (4) the degree to which conflicting claims are given fair and balanced review. Ideally, risk information should use language and concepts re- cipients already understand. It is difficult to present scientific and technical information that uses everyday language and magnitudes common in ordinary experience and that is sensitive to such psycho- Togical needs on the part of recipients as the desire for clear, decisive answers or the fear of the unfamiliar and unknown. Sometimes risk communicators must disseminate messages when there are not enough relevant data to allow them to draw satisfactory conclusions and there is no time to obtain better information. This usually occurs when an emergency requires that action be taken im- mediately or not at all or when events lead to requests for information prior to the completion of study or analysis. Many things compete with risk messages for attention, and it is often difficult to get the intended recipients to attend to the issues the risk communicator thinks are important. From the risk com- municator's standpoint, there are two aspects of this: stimulating the attention of the ultimate recipient and interacting with the news media and other intermediaries. There are, of course, several differ- ent ways that messages can reach the final recipients: face-to-face (physician to patient, friend to friend, within the family), in groups (work sites, cIassrooms), through professional or volunteer organi- zations (American Medical Association, Red Cross), through the mass media (radio, television, magazines, newspapers, direct mail, billboards), and through community service agencies (at libraries, hospitals, mails, fairs). Recipients of risk messages may have difficulty deciding which issues to attend to or what to do because they cannot get information from officials and other message sources that satisfactorily answers their questions. This can happen when authorities do not listen of the source; t3) previous statements or
OCR for page 8
8 IMPROVING RISK CO~UNICATION and therefore do not provide what the recipient considers relevant information or because the individual is unable to find a trusted source or interpreter of already available information. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS In formulating recommendations we focused on the preparation and dissemination of formal risk messages to audiences that include nonexperts and on only two of the many types of risk-managing organizations: government agencies and large private corporations. Nevertheless, our recommendations are intended to attack the prob- lems of recipients of risk messages as well. The goal cannot be only to make those who disseminate formal risk messages more effective by improving their credibility, understandability, and so on. Such an approach might serve their interests, but it could well degrade the overall quality of risk communication if it merely meant that they could advance their viewpoints with greater influence. Risk commu- nication can be improved only if recipients are also helped to solve their problems at the same time. The risk communication process usually with many messages from many sources-can be considered successful only to the extent that it, first, improves or increases the base of accurate information that decision makers use, be they government officials, industry man- agers, or individual citizens, and, second, satisfies those involved that they are adequately informed within the limits of available knowI- edge. This does not always result in the responses a particular source might wish, nor does it always lead to consensus about controver- sial issues or to uniform personal behavior. People do not all share common interests and values, and so better understanding will not necessarily lead them all to the same conclusion. Improving risk communication is therefore more than merely crafting "better messages." Risk communication procedures as well as risk message content must be improved. Because risk communi- cation is so tightly linked to the management of risks, solutions to the problems of risk communication often entail changes in risk man- agement and risk analysis. Once the constraints, limitations, and incentives affecting the preparation and dissemination of messages- as well as how these factors become manifest in what we call the risk communication process-are understood, improvements can be implemented.
OCR for page 9
SUMMARY . ", . · . 9 This is not to imply, however, that there is a single shortcut to improving the nation's risk communication efforts. The needed improvement can come only incrementally and only from careful attention to many details. Risk managers need to consider risk com- munication as an important and integral aspect of risk management. Four sets of recommendations are presented: (1) recommenda- tions that pertain to the processes that source organizations use to generate decisions, knowledge, and risk messages; (2) recommenda- tions that pertain to the content of individual risk messages; (3) a call for a "consumer's guide" that will enhance the ability of other groups or individuals to understand and participate in risk manage- ment activities; and (4) a brief summary of research needs. Two broad themes run through the process and content recom- mendations. The first is the recognition that risk communication efforts should be more systematically oriented to the intended au- diences. The most effective risk messages are those that quite self- consciously address the audiences' perspectives and concerns. The second is that openness is the surest policy. A central premise of democratic government the existence of an informed electorate- implies a free flow of information. Suppression of relevant infor- mation is not only wrong but also, over the longer term, usually ineffective. . Management of the Process We identified four process objectives that are key elements in improving risk communication: (1) goal setting, (2) openness, (3) balance, and (4) competence. Setting Realistic Goals Risk communication activities ought to be matters of conscious design. Practical goals should be established that explicitly accom- modate the political/legal mandates and constraints bounding the process and the roles of the potential recipients of the organization's risk messages, on the one hand, and clearly show the contribution to improved understanding of issues and actions on the other. Ex- plicit consideration of such factors encourages realistic expectations, clarification of motives and objectives (both within the source orga- nization and among outside groups and individuals), and evaluation of performance.
OCR for page 10
10 Safeguarding Openness IMPROVING RISK COMMUNICATION Risk communication should be a two-way street. Organizations that communicate about risks should ensure effective dialogue with potentially affected outsiders. This two-way process should exhibit (1) a spirit of open exchange in a common undertaking rather than a series of "canned" briefings restricted to technical "nonemotional" issues and (2) early and sustained interchange that includes the media and other message intermediaries. Openness does not ordinarily, however' imply empowerment to determine the host organization's risk management decisions. To avoid misunderstanding, the limits of participation should be made clear from the outset. Safeguarding Balance and Accuracy in Risk Messages In order to help ensure that risk messages are not distorted and do not appear to be distorted, those who manage the generation of risk assessments and risk messages should (1) hold the preparers of messages accountable for detecting and reducing distortion; (2) consider review by recognized independent experts of the underly- ing assessment and, when feasible, the message; (3) subject draft messages, if possible, to outside preview to determine if audiences detect any overlooked distortions; and (4) prepare and release for comment a "white paper" on the risk assessment and risk reduction assessment. Fostering Competence Risk managers need to use procedures that incorporate two dis- tinct types of expertise: on the risk subject matter (e.g., carcinogenic risk, occupational safety) and on risk communication. Organizations that communicate about risk should take steps to ensure that the preparation of risk messages becomes a deliberate, specialized under- taking, taking care that in the process they do not sacrifice scientific quality. Such steps include (1) deliberately considering the makeup of the intended audience and demonstrating how the choice of me- dia and message reflects an understanding of the audience and its concerns; (2) attracting appropriate communications specialists and training technical staff in communications; (3) requiring systematic assurance that substantive risk experts within the organization have
OCR for page 11
SUMMARY 11 a voice in producing accurate assessments and the derivative risk message; (4) establishing a thoughtful program of evaluating the past performance of risk communication efforts; and (5) ensuring that their organizations improve their understanding of the roles of intermediaries, particularly media reporters and editors, including an understanding of the factors that make a risk story newsworthy, of the practical time and space constraints, and of the limited technical background of most media personnel. Risk Communication in Crisis Conditions The process for risk communication in crisis conditions requires special care. Risk managers should ensure that (l) where there is a foreseeable potential for emergency, advance plans for communica- tion are drafted, and (2) there is provision for coordinating among the various authorities that might be involved and, to the extent feasible, a single place where the public and the media can obtain authoritative and current information. Content of Risk Messages We identified four generic issues that have been the source of difficulty in the past over a broad range of risk communication efforts: (1) audience orientation, (2) uncertainty, (3) risk comparisons, and (4) completeness. Relating the Message to the Audiences' Perspectives 7 Risk messages should closely reflect the perspectives' technical capacity, and concerns of the target audiences. A message should (1) emphasize information relevant to any practical actions that in- dividuals can take; (2) be couched in clear and plain language; (3) respect the audience and its concerns; and (4) seek to inform the recipient, unless conditions clearly warrant the use of influencing techniques. One of the most difficult issues in risk communication in a democratic society is the extent to which public officials should attempt to influence individuals that is, to go beyond merely in- form~ng them concerning risks and such risk-reducing actions as quitting smoking.
OCR for page 12
12 Handling Uncertainty IMPROVING RISK COMMUNICATION Risk messages and supporting materials should not minimize the existence of uncertainty. Data gaps and areas of significant disagreement among experts should be disclosed. Some indication of the level of confidence of estimates and the significance of scientific uncertainty should be conveyed. Comparing Risks Risk comparisons can be helpful, but they should be presented with caution. Comparison must be seen as only one of several inputs to risk decisions, not as the primary determinant. There are proven pitfalls when risks of diverse character are compared, especially when the intent of the comparison can be seen as that of rn~nimizing a risk (by equating it to a seemingly trivial one). More useful are comparisons of risks that help convey the magnitude of a particular risk estimate, that occur in the same decision context (e.g., risks from flying and driving to a given destination), and that have a similar outcome. Multiple comparisons may avoid some of the worst pitfalls. More work needs to be done to develop constructive and helpful forms of risk comparison. Ensuring Completeness A complete information base would contain five types of infor- mation: (1) on the nature of the risk, (2) on the nature of the benefits that might be changed if risk were reduced, (3) on the avail- able alternatives, (4) on uncertainty in knowledge about risks and benefits, and (5) on management issues. There are major advantages in putting the information base into written form as an adjunct to the risk message. A Consumer's Guide to Risk and Risk Commnnication Major government and private organizations that sustain risk communication efforts should jointly fund the development of a Con- sumer's Guide to Risk and Risk Communication. The purpose of this guide would be to articulate key terms, concepts, and trade-offs in risk communication and risk management for the lay audience, to
OCR for page 13
SUMMARY 13 help audiences discern rn~sleading and incomplete information, and to facilitate the needed general participation in risk issues. Such a guide should (1) involve support from, but not control by, the fed- eral government and other sources of risk messages; (2) be under the editorial control of a group that is clearly oriented toward the recipients of risk messages and under administrative management by an organization that is known for its independence and familiarity with lay perspectives and that can undertake the needed outreach and public information effort; and (3) cover subjects such as the nature of risk communication, concepts of zero risk and comparative risk, evaluation of risk messages, and others designated by project participants. Research Needs As a result of our cleliberations, we have identified nine research topics for attention: (1) risk comparison, (2) risk characterization, (3) role of message intermediaries, (4) pertinency and sufficiency of risk information, (5) psychological stress, (6) the "mental models" of recipients, (7) risk literacy, (8) retrospective case studies of risk communication, and (9) contemporaneous assessment of risk man- agement and risk communication. Two criteria guided their selection: (1) that additional knowledge would lead to material improvement in risk communication practices and (2) that creation of such knowI- edge is likely given past results and current research methods. We have not assigned priorities among the nine topics.
Representative terms from entire chapter:

If a powerful hurricane slams the Louisiana coast during the Republican National Convention, the resonances with Katrina will be bad enough. But the storm would also showcase the GOP’s position on climate change, which is, increasingly, to deny the scientific consensus that fossil-fuel pollution contributes to a warming atmosphere and destructive weather patterns—including stronger hurricanes.
Although scientists caution that no single weather event can be attributed directly to climate change, major events such as Katrina and this summer’s drought fire up a debate that has become more incendiary in recent years as more Republican lawmakers doubt climate science.
The question of whether the GOP accepts climate science didn’t come up in 2008, when Hurricane Gustav slammed into the Gulf Coast during the party’s Minnesota convention. That’s because the nominee, Sen. John McCain of Arizona, believed in climate change and professed a desire to solve it.
Since then, the mainstream GOP view is to deny the scientific findings that link man-made pollution to climate change, and Mitt Romney has publicly walked back his onetime position that humans contribute to warming. Vice presidential nominee Paul Ryan has also questioned the science.
But stronger hurricanes are among the most serious consequences of climate change induced by the burning of fossil fuels (the Romney campaign favors such burning), and the Gulf Coast is likely to experience the worst effects, according to a 2012 report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and a 2009 report authored by 13 federal agencies.
Kerry Emanuel, a climate scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who has authored one of many reports on the increasing frequency of high-intensity hurricanes, said that the data link warming air and water surfaces to stronger, more devastating hurricanes.
“As the temperature of the tropical ocean increases, you see greater intensity and the frequency of intense storms goes up,” Emanuel said.
Michael Oppenheimer, a professor of geosciences at Princeton University and a member of the Nobel Prize-winning Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, said the science shows clearly that reducing oil, coal, and gas pollution could help prevent damage related to climate change. “There’s a risk, which scientists have identified, that it’s likely we’ll have more strong hurricanes, and one of the things we can do to prepare is reduce fossil-fuel emissions,” he said. “It’s just like building levees.”
Environmentalists are targeting Republicans for their views. Around Tampa, the Florida Wildlife Federation has posted billboards of prominent Republicans, such as Ohio Gov. John Kasich and former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani, who have acknowledged climate change as a problem and called for solutions.
“We think this is one of the most important policy issues that there is,” said Federation President Manley Fuller. “It’s treated as a partisan issue, and it should not be. The billboards remind Republicans of what well-known Republicans have said about this.”
Last week, the League of Conservation Voters launched a $1.5 million campaign to defeat five House Republicans who deny the science of climate change. The “Flat Earth Five” campaign is the first time the League has targeted a group of lawmakers explicitly because of their positions on climate.
Want to stay ahead of the curve? Sign up for National Journal’s AM & PM Must Reads. News and analysis to ensure you don’t miss a thing.

The rate of new HIV infections in the United States remained stable between 2006 and 2009 though infections increased among young black gay and bisexual men, according to a new report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The first multiyear estimate of national HIV incidences found new infections have remained steady with an estimated 50,000 new infections each year. But the agency expressed concerns about the “alarming” rate of new infections among young black gay and bisexual men, where there was a 48 percent increase in new infections between 2006 and 2009.
“Blacks account for almost half of all new infections in 2009. The overall infection rate is more than eight times higher than whites,” CDC's Joseph Prejean told a telephone briefing.
Prejean attributed the increase in new infections to a lack of access to health care and the stigma surrounding homosexuality and HIV. He also said insular communities make the spread of disease easier. In black communities where blacks are more likely to date other blacks, when an infected person is introduced to the community, disease spreads.
“HIV remains one of the most glaring health disparities in this country,” said Dr. Kevin Fenton, director of the National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD and TB Prevention at the CDC. “While we all have individual responsibility to protect ourselves from HIV infection, the research clearly shows that individual risk behavior alone doesn’t account for the significant racial disparities in HIV. It is essential to understand the underlying factors that contribute to these disparities, such as poverty, discrimination, and lack of access to health care.”
People of color have been hard hit by the HIV epidemic. Though blacks make up about 14 percent of the population, they accounted for about 44 percent of new HIV infections in 2009. Black women accounted for 57 percent of all new HIV infections among women in 2009. The infection rate among black women was 15 times that of white women. Latinos accounted for 20 percent of new infections in 2009, while making up 16 percent of the population. HIV rates remain highest among gay and bisexual Latino men.
To address the rate of infections, the CDC is pursuing a “High-Impact Prevention” program, where the agency will reevaluate current prevention activities for their effectiveness, cost, and coverage to get to areas that have a greater need for preventative efforts. Fenton said the program will work with primary care physicians and community health clinics to get more Americans tested—less than half of the population reports having been tested.

One possible risk factor for tuberculosis is diabetes, a condition characterized by high blood sugar levels and long-term complications involving the circulation, eyes and kidneys, and the body’s ability to fight infection. Active tuberculosis can be cured by taking a combination of several antibiotics every day for at least six months, and current control efforts [...]
Pickled dills in plastic? Turmeric is the key to freshness. Who knew that a spice used from ancient times as a coloring agent in foods could also keep plastic-packaged dill pickles fresh? Unlike glass containers, plastic jars or pouches “breathe,” allowing oxygen and other gases to seep inside over time. This can eventually lead to [...]
Scientists have found that a modified whey protein prevents breast cancer in some laboratory rats. It’s an important medical discovery, considering that 180,000 U.S. women develop breast cancer each year, and 1 in 8 women will develop breast cancer over her lifetime. Breast cancer is a disease where a mutant cell in the breast forms [...]
A study by researchers at the University of Southampton has shown evidence of increased levels of hyperactivity in young children consuming mixtures of some artificial food colours (dyes) and the preservative sodium benzoate. The possibility of food colours [dyes] and preservatives affecting children’s behaviour has long been an unresolved question for parents. This significant new [...]
Since the discovery of leptin in 1994, many have hoped that the hormone would be a promising weight-loss treatment for humans. Leptin acts as a signal to help the body decide when it has eaten enough food to feel full. The amount of leptin in the blood has been directly linked to body fat.
The richest food sources of potassium are fruits and vegetables. People who eat large amounts of fruits and vegetables have a high potassium intake (8-11 grams/day). (National Academies Press; 2004:173-246). Listed below are some food sources high in potassium from the USDA National Nutrient Database. Note the potassium content in bananas compared with tomato products. [...]
Study shows substantial improvement in autism symptoms with early intervention treatment. Intensive intervention given to toddlers with autism as young as three years old can significantly raise IQ levels, potentially allowing them to benefit from mainstream education, new research has revealed. Researchers at the University of Southampton, led by Professor Bob Remington of the School [...]
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease with three diet-associated aspects. One is elevated resting energy expenditure. Another is elevated whole-body protein catabolism – a destructive form of muscle metabolism that translates to muscle wasting. And yet another is low body cell mass, which leads to increased fat mass. For some people, the benefits of [...]
Scientists at the University of Southampton, funded by the UK’s leading dementia research charity, the Alzheimer’s Research Trust, are a step closer to understanding why proteins such as ‘amyloid’ clog-up the brain in Alzheimer’s disease.
It has been widely reported that drugs that lower cholesterol may slow the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. The role of cholesterol in Alzheimer’s disease is attracting increasing attention from researchers and there are conflicting messages coming form a great deal of reports. Despite the fact that wide-spread opinion about high levels of cholesterol still remains [...]
Natural food may be one of the natural remedies for gout and arthritis pain relief. A study suggests that natural compounds in cherries may reduce painful arthritis inflammation. Cherries already have a reputation for fighting inflammation. So what’s new about the Agricultural Research Service (ARS) study carried out by ARS scientists and their university colleagues. [...]
Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT) is a treatment program for prevention of relapses in depression and the treatment of anxiety disorders. Is MBCT an acceptable intervention to patients with depression and anxiety? The course exercises There was a wide range of views on the course exercises, in particular the body-scan and walking meditation. While some [...]
More fat in the diet decreases leptin levels while a diet higher in carbohydrates increases leptin levels according to a study. Leptin, made by the body’s fat cells, is thought to help contribute to satiety, a feeling of fullness.
An upcoming study should help reveal how two kinds of sugars in our foods, glucose and fructose, affect the body’s production of leptin and insulin. Agricultural Research Service chemist Nancy L. Keim, Peter J. Havel and Craig H. Warden, a genetics and pediatrics researcher at U.C. Davis, are collaborating in this leptin and insulin investigation. [...]
ARS scientists and colleagues have isolated and characterized several polyphenolic polymer compounds from cinnamon bark that could one day become natural ingredients in products aimed at lowering blood sugar levels. The newly identified chemical structures were recently named in a patent application and described in the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. ARS chemist Richard [...]
Several clinical studies have shown that plant stanol esters are effective agents that lower cholesterol. The ability to lower cholesterol with dietary plant stanol ester has been shown to be sustained for periods up to 12 months, but how soon the full cholesterol lowering effect of plant stanol esters can be obtained, is still unclear. [...]

Earth Day was officially on 22 April, but in many communities and countries around the world it’s celebrated for the entire week or month. Earth Day was founded 40 years ago by U.S. Senator Gaylord Nelson of Wisconsin. His goal was to create a grassroots movement that would show the government just how concerned Americans were about the environment and get laws enacted that would enforce protection of the earth and its inhabitants – us.
By the end of that year, in December 1970, the Environmental Protection Agency opened its doors. A very good start.
Since that time, there have been many years when there has been little to celebrate. Although there has been continual progress, including some milestones, there have also been pretty serious setbacks. For example, of the 80,000 chemicals that have been produced and used in the U.S. since the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) was enacted 34 years ago, only 200 have been tested by the EPA, and only five have been regulated.
But in the last year, the EPA has undergone some equally serious reform. Finally, the agency is really buckling down on toxic chemicals, both in the environment and in consumer goods.
There is special attention on children, as it should be. Children are most susceptible to toxic chemicals because their bodies are still growing. In the not too distant future, it is our children and grandchildren, the little ones asleep in their cribs right now, who will lead the way in politics, as teachers, as firefighters, artists, business owners and so on, and so on.
To do their jobs well, to achieve their goals and have a satisfying, happy and productive life, they need to be healthy.
At Naturepedic, we celebrate Earth Day every day. We give children a healthy start in life by manufacturing our award-winning organic baby crib mattresses that are certified by GREENGUARD and enjoy the unique distinction of being the only crib mattress recommended by Healthy Child Healthy World.
Do you have a Naturepedic mattress for your infant or toddler? If not, you might want to celebrate Earth Day/Week/Month by checking them out at http://www.Naturepedic.com.
You can also celebrate Earth Day by working on creating a personal environment that is more chemical-free. It really doesn’t take much to get a good start. Read Going Green in 2010 – A Few Simple Things With A Big Impact for some helpful hints that make a real difference.
Start now, and next year your family will also have even more to celebrate on Earth Day!
Tags: award-winning organic baby crib mattress, baby crib mattresses, Crib Mattress, crib mattresses, Earth Day, Environmental Protection Agency, EPA, EPA reform, going green, mattress for infant or toddley, Naturepedic, organic baby crib mattress, toxic chemicals, Toxic Substances Control Act, TSCA

Algebraic structure may mean either
There are several notions of an algebraic structure on an object of some category or higher category, which differ in generality. It may be to be an algebra over an algebraic theory, algebra over an operad (or higher operad) or an algebra over a monad, or over a prop, over a properad etc. See also variety of algebras.
There is also an older notion of an algebraic structure/algebra as a model for a one-sorted theory where the only relation symbols in the language involved are and equality (with standard interpretation in models). This notion includes for example fields which are not an algebraic theory in the sense of monads (because there are no free objects in the case of fields, i.e. the category of fields is not monadic over the category of sets).
There is a forgetful functor from the category of algebras/algebraic structures of some type (in any of the above formalisms) to the original category. This functor forgets structure in the sense of stuff, structure, property. We say that a functor in the base category preserves some algebraic structure if it lifts to the corresponding category of algebras.

Obs via Google Maps
Oil & Gas ADCP
Ship Obs Report
Obs Web Widget
NDBC on Facebook
NDBC DQC Handbook
Hurricane Data Plots
Handbook No. 1
See recent photos from TAO buoy 8N 110W
How can I compute the distance from a buoy to shore, an inlet, or another reference location?
Often, when you ask us how far a buoy is away from a location, we don't know the exact location of the jetty, inlet, or the point on shore that you are referring to. We'd hate to guess and give you the wrong information. However, it's fairly easy to determine this yourself if you can find the latitude and longitude of your reference position.
Copy the station's latitude and longitude from the station page. Next, look up the latitude and longitude of the inlet, lighthouse, town, or other geographic feature you are interested in. You can find these on NOAA nautical charts: http://chartmaker.ncd.noaa.gov/staff/charts.htm provides a listing of these charts which you can purchase.
When you have this information, do an Internet search for a "Great Circle Calculator" and go to one of the web sites featuring this type of calculator.
Here's a Great Circle Calculator offered by NOAA's National Hurricane Center: http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/gccalc.shtml.
Then, enter the latitude and longitude of our buoy and the position of your reference location. The calculator will provide the distance in in your choice of units.

NetWellness is a global, community service providing quality, unbiased health information from our partner university faculty. NetWellness is commercial-free and does not accept advertising.
Saturday, May 18, 2013
Addiction and Substance Abuse
Later effects of substance abuse
My husband actively abused drugs and alcohol from his teens to early 30`s. He`s now in his 50`s and is having memory problems along with other physical ailments. I wondered if there have been studies done to understand the long term effects (especially on the brain) of substance abuse; and what the difference is with later long term abstinence.
Thank you for your question about what sounds like a very difficult situation. There are some things that are known ... and some that are unknown.
1) Alcohol abuse is by far the most damaging to the brain and nervous system, and tends to be an immediate thing - meaning that once a person is sober for several months, the toxic effects of alcohol either "freeze" where they are or even resolve gradually to some degree. It is NOT typical for past alcohol problems to produce progressive / new / on-going brain effects.
2) The drugs that have the most brain effects are PCP / LSD / Marijuana / and Amphetamines - especially methamphetamine. Generally cocaine and opioids (heroin and other prescription pain medicines) do not produce long-term damage to the brain / nervous system.
3) If a person suffered pretty severe liver damage from either alcoholic cirrhosis, or hepatitis C or B, or a combination, then this can certainly produce progressive deterioration in brain function many years to decades later. It is the same situation if a person was infected by HIV as a consequence of their addictive disease.
That is the bad news. The good news is that IF he is truly sober, then be SURE that none of the following reversible or fairly treatable causes are not active for him. Be sure that he is:
- not on prescription drugs that are potentially addictive.
- not on other non-addictive medicines that can cause brain function problems. (Anything from some blood pressure medications to psychiatric medications to anti-seizure medications can cause brain function problems and result in deterioration.)
- receiving plenty of vitamins and a well-balanced diet.
- not hypothyroid.
- not depressed or impaired from any other psychiatric disease.
- not suffering from low oxygen (emphysema/COPD).
- not suffering from a toxic exposure like heavy metals.
Hope this guidance helps a little bit.
Ted Parran, MD
Associate Professor of General Medical Sciences
School of Medicine
Case Western Reserve University

California, the largest and most important of the Pacific Coast States, is the second State of the United States in point of area, and the twenty-first in point of population. It is bounded on the north by the State of Oregon; on the east by the State of Nevada and, for a comparatively short distance, by the Territory of Arizona; on the south by the Peninsula of Lower California (Mexico); and on the west by the Pacific Ocean. It lies entirely between 42° and 32° N. lat., and between 12°5 and 11°3 W. long. It is 800 miles long, running in a north-westerly and south-easterly direction, and has an average width of 200 miles. According to the official returns of the United States Census of 1900, its total area is 158,360 square miles. Of this number 2,188 square miles constitute the water area; the total land area, therefore, is 156,172 square miles. The capital of the State is Sacramento, with a population (1900) of 29,000. San Francisco, built on San Francisco Bay, is the metropolis, with a population (1900) of 342,000. The other chief cities, with a population according to the United States Census of 1900, are Los Angeles, 102,000; Oakland, 66,000; San José, 21,000; San Diego, 17,000; Stockton, 17,000; Alameda, 17,000; Berkeley and Fresno, 12,000. These figures have been enormously increased since 1900. The estimated population of the three largest cities in January, 1907, was as follows: San Francisco, 400,000; Oakland, 276,000; and Los Angeles, 245,000.
The State presents two systems of mountains which converge at Mount Shasta, in the north, and Tehachapi, in the south. The outer, or western, range is called the Coast Range, and is close to the sea, in some places coming down precipitately to the water's edge; the eastern range is called the Sierra Nevada. The latter is considerably higher than the former, and in several peaks reaches a height of more than 14,000 feet. The Sierra Nevadas extend along the eastern border of the State for about 450 miles; they are but a portion, physically, of the Cascade Range, which traverses also the States of Oregon and Washington. The Sierra Nevada Range is practically unbroken throughout the entire length of the State of California, the Coast Range is broken by the magnificent harbour of San Francisco. Both of these ranges follow the general contour of the coast line. Between them lies a great valley which is drained by the Sacramento River in the north and the San Joaquin River in the south. These two rivers, navigable by steamers for about 100 miles from their mouth in San Francisco Bay, constitute a great parent water-system of California, and both empty into the harbour of San Francisco, which is situated approximately midway between the northern and southern extremities of the State. The Sierra Nevada Mountains form the great watershed from which are fed most of the rivers and streams of California. The combined valleys of the Sacramento and the San Joaquin rivers are approximately 500 miles long, and have an average width of 50 miles. This area, the surface of which is quite level, is one of the most fertile regions in the world.
In addition to those already mentioned, the divisions of the mountain ranges form numerous smaller valleys. The principal of these are Sonoma, Napa, Ukiah, Vaca, Contra Costa, and Alameda valleys in the north; and Santa Clara, Pajaro, and Salinas valleys in the south. South of the Tehachapi Range, in Southern California, is another low-lying stretch of country which has become the centre of the citrus industry and the home of a large variety of semi-tropical fruits. In the south-eastern part of the State and east of the mountains is the low-lying desert region consisting of the Mojave Desert and Death Valley. Owing to the great height of the Sierra Nevada Mountains and their comparative proximity to the sea, the numerous streams, fed from their glaciers and perpetual snows, afford abundant water-power throughout their steep descent to the sea. This power is utilized for generating light and operating mills and factories.
California has one of the finest harbours in the world, San Francisco Bay, capable of accommodating the combined navies of the world. There are five other bays forming good harbours, San Diego, San Pedro, Humboldt, Santa Barbara, and Monterey bays. The 800 miles of California's length from north to south are equal to the combined length of ten States on the Atlantic seaboard; the northern line of California is on the same latitude as Boston, and the southern line is that of Savannah, Georgia. The entire state is subject to the beneficent influence of the Japan Current. The climate is equable; except in the high mountains, snow and the extremes of cold, experienced in the same latitudes on the Atlantic Coast, are unknown. There are, in reality, but two seasons: the wet and the dry. The wet or rainy season lasts from about September to April, during which the rains are occasional, alternating with clear weather. During the entire summer the winds from the west and south-west blow over the coast, keeping the weather cool, and not infrequently bringing in cold fogs towards evening. But it is chiefly in the balminess of its winters that the climate of California excels. It is never too cold to work outdoors, and the citrus fruits, semi-tropical as they are, grow to perfection throughout the valleys of California. The records of the climate left by early Franciscan missionaries who evangelized California are duplicated by those of the Government Weather Bureau of today.
The population of California, according to the United States Census of 1900, is 1,485,053, or 9.5 per square mile. This figure constitutes an increase of 22.7 percent upon the population of 1890. The following table, taken from the United States Census of 1900, exhibits the population of California in each census year since its admission into the Federal Union, its rank among the States in point of population, and the percentage of increase in its population during the period of ten years between each census:
|Year||Rank||Population||Percentage of Increase|
The census of 1900 also presents the following details of population: (a) White, 1,402,727; African, 11,045; Indian, 15,377; Chinese, 45,753; Japanese, 10,151. (b) Native-born, 1,117,813; Foreign-born, 367,240; (c) Males, 820,531; Females, 664,522. The estimated population of California (January, 1907) is 2,217,897, an increase of 732,844, or 49.3 percent since the census of 1900.
The soil of the State of California is rich and highly productive. It consists for the most part of alluvial deposits. This is especially true of the delta lands of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers. Much of the so-called desert land consists of a rich subsoil covered with but a thin crust of sand. The value of irrigation in making this desert land productive, as well as in enriching the soil by bearing to it the washed-out life-principles from the uplands, is almost incalculable. The soil readily responds to the plough, and there is no hard, tough subsoil to be turned and mellowed. California has approximately 40,000,000 acres of arable land. To this must be added fully 10,000,000 acres of its so-called desert land, which needs but the touch of water from its irrigation systems to make it as productive as the valley or farm lands. The remaining 50,000,000 acres of California's domain, the mountainous and desert acreage, afford pasturage for millions of cattle and sheep. The chief products of the soil of California are hay, grain, fruits, wines, lumber, dairy produce, and livestock. It may be safely said that, in the combined values of these products, California is the richest in the United States. Ships loaded with her grain at San Francisco Bay carry their precious cargoes to every port in the world; her fruits, packed in special cars and shipped by fast freight, are the first choice in Chicago and New York, and find a ready market in London; her wines have given a standard of excellence to American wines, and "American wines" means "California wines" the world over.
The total value of all California's agricultural products, according to the census of 1900, was $131,690,606. The value of the output in 1906 reached the total of $213,000,000. The following table presents the total output of agricultural products in detail for the year 1906:
Asparagus 23,000,000 pounds
Almonds 4,200,000 pounds
Apricots 585,000 pounds
Apples 132,455,000 pounds
Beans 125,000,000 pounds
Barley 24,000,000 bushels
Brandy 4,070,992 gallons
Citrus Fruits 18,220,000 boxes
Canned Fruits and Veg. 4,475,751 cases
Corn 2,000,000 bushels
Cherries 5,382,000 pounds
Figs 45,000 pounds
Grapes 73,224,000 pounds
Hops 73,000 bales
Hay 3,000,000 tonnes
Lumber 900,000,000 feet
Pears 54,390,000 pounds
Peaches 21,015,000 pounds
Plums 43,938,000 pounds
Prunes 180,000,000 pounds
Raisins 100,000,000 pounds
Other Dried Fruit 41,000,000 pounds
Olive Oil 51,000 gallons
Potatoes 6,500,000 bushels
Walnuts 12,800,000 pounds
Wool 22,000,000 pounds
Wheat 4,700,000 centals
Wine 41,000,000 gallons
The total annual output of fruit from California farms is $40,000,000, and this is made up of all known fruits that grow in temperate and semi-tropical climates. In the year 1906 there were 30,000,000 fruit trees in California; this figure does not include nuts, figs, olives, or berries. Six million of these fruit trees belong to Santa Clara Valley alone. The principal fruit trees are as follows: apple trees, 4,000,000; apricot trees, 3,500,000; cherry trees, 1,000,000; peach trees, 4,500,000; pear trees, 2,000,000; orange trees, 6,000,000; lemon trees, 2,000,000. There are 272,500 acres of land devoted to the cultivation of grapes: 250,000 for wine, and 22,500 for table grapes.
The total value of the output in manufactures in 1900, according to the census, was $302,874,761. In 1906 it amounted to $400,000,000. The chief elements contributing to California's success in manufactures are an abundance of raw material from her soil, cheap fuel from her forests, and cheap power from her streams. The heaviest items of manufacture are sugar, lumber and timber products, flour, machinery, and leather goods. During 1906 the total output of sugar was 62,110 tons. The discovery of rich deposits of petroleum has given an impetus to manufactures that is already far-reaching in its results. In 1900 there were 12,582 manufacturing plants in California, representing a total investment of $205,395,025, and giving employment to 98,931 persons; the sum paid out for labour was $55,786,776, and for materials, $188,125,602.
Mining is still one of the most important industries of California, notwithstanding that the flood of population first lured to her mountains by the discovery of gold has long ago been turned to agriculture and commerce. There are some forty-seven mineral substances now being mined in the State. The value of the total output in 1900 was $28,870,405. In 1906 it was over $54,000,000. Gold, petroleum, and copper are now the most valuable items of this output. In the same year there were 1,107 producing mines in the State. The value of the gold output was $19,700,000; silver, $2,460,000; copper, $3,750,000; quicksilver, $904,000; petroleum, $10,000,000. It is estimated that in the petroleum industry alone the total investment is more than $20,000,000; 35,000,000 barrels of oil were produced in 1906. There are also large and valuable deposits of brick and pottery clays, lime, asphaltum, bitumen, and iron ore.
Twenty-two per cent of the area of the State is forest-clad, and the importance of the lumber industry in California increases each year as the mountains of the east and the north are denuded of their trees. California is the home of the redwood (Sequoia). These remarkable trees attain a height of three hundred feet in the famous groves of Big Trees in Mariposa and Calveras Counties. Redwood and pine are the two principle woods. It is estimated that, without the growth of another tree, the forests of California can not be exhausted for two hundred years. San Francisco alone sends 400,000,000 feet of lumber to the world each year. The total output of the State for 1906 was 900,000,000 feet. There are $16,000,000 invested in the industry, 250 mills, and the value of the total output, together with the by-products of the forests, is $17,000,000--the lumber itself amounting to $8,500,000.
Throughout the splendid harbour of San Francisco passes by far the greatest part of the ocean commerce of California, as well as of the entire Pacific Coast. The harbours of the State now carry on an ocean commerce of about $100,000,000 per year, the precise figure for 1906 being: imports $49,193,303; exports $45,479,422. The total foreign commerce of the State for 1900 was $119,212,911, and in 1906 San Francisco was fourth among the cities of the United States in point of customs receipts. Besides the ocean commerce of California with every port of the world which passes through her harbours, she has direct communication by rail with every quarter of the United States. Four great transcontinental railroads carry her goods and passengers to and from her cities, and a fifth is now (1907) nearing completion. In 1900 the total railroad mileage of the State was 5,532.
The educational system of the State commences with primary schools and continues through grammar schools and high schools, culminating in the State University. These are all public schools, being supported by the State and counties, and affording free education to all. The State Constitution creates the office of Superintendent of Public Instruction; it also provides for a superintendent of schools for each of the fifty-seven counties of the State. It makes provision for the maintenance of the public school system, and directs that the proceeds of all public lands and of all escheated estates shall be appropriated to the support of the common schools. The State University is situated at Berkeley on the Bay of San Francisco. It was created by act of the legislature on 23, March, 1868, and this act is confirmed by the present constitution (that of 1879), making the organization and government of the university perpetual. The university is designed for the education of male and female students alike, and in fact the principle of co-education is recognized and put in practice in nearly all state educational institutions.
The total number of professors, including the various officers of instruction and research, in the University of California, for the year ending 30 June, 1906, was 318, as follows: academic, 252; art, 9; Lick Astronomical Observatory, 9; law, 6; medicine, 34; pharmacy, 8. The total number of students for the same period was 3,338, of whom 2,007 were men, and 1,331 women, the women being nearly 40 percent of the total enrollment. This percentage is far higher in the Colleges of Letters, Social Sciences, and Natural Sciences, in which, as an average, the women outnumber the men more than two to one. The College of Agriculture, as well as several other technological colleges, including the College of Mechanics, the College of Mining, the College of Commerce, the College of Civil Engineering, and the College of Chemistry, are designed to afford a complete technical training in their respective branches. The Affiliated Colleges of the University, being the schools of Law, Medicine, Pharmacy, and Dentistry, are situated in San Francisco; there are several experiment stations for which the university receives $15,000 annually from the Federal Government; and there is a State University Farm of 780 acres at Davisville. The university has been the recipient of munificent endowments both from the State and from private persons. In addition to these, and the proceeds of public land already mentioned, a direct tax of two cents on every $100 of taxable property in the State is levied, and applied to the support of the university. But four of the fifty-seven counties of the State have no high school, and some counties have several. There are also five normal schools, situated respectively at San Francisco, Los Angeles, San José, San Diego, and Chico. In addition to these there are night schools, technical schools, and commercial schools in all the large cities of the State.
The public school system of the State was founded in the constitutional convention at Monterey, in September, 1849. The 500,000 acres of land granted by Congress to new States for the purpose of internal improvement were appropriated to constitute a perpetual school fund. It was also provided that a school should be kept in each district at least three months each year to secure any share of the State school funds. In the school year ending 30 June, 1906, there were 3,227 primary and grammar schools in the State, and 117 high schools. The total number of teachers in the public schools was 9,371; the total number of pupils, 321,870. The total number of pupils in private schools was 43,080. California has been more than lavish in her provision for her public school system. The total income of her public schools during the scholastic year 1905-06 was $11,494,670.29. The total value of public school property for the same year was $23,860,341. This does not include the State University. The total income of the State University for the same period was $1,564,190. The Leland Stanford Junior University is situated at Palo Alto. It was founded by Mr. and Mrs. Leland Stanford as a memorial to their only child. The total value of the endowments given to the university by its founders reaches the astonishing figure of $26,000,000. Like the University of California, it is co-educational, but the number of women students is limited to 500. The university was opened to students in 1891.
The work of religious education in California is confined almost exclusively to institutions under Catholic auspices. In California the Catholic Church, notwithstanding that she receives no financial aid from the State, and that the support of her schools and colleges must be derived entirely from contributions of the faithful, has done great things in the cause of Christian education. The great pioneers of Catholic education in California were the Jesuits. In 1851 Santa Clara College was founded by the venerable Father John Nobili, S.J. This was followed, four years later, by the establishment of St. Ignatius College in San Francisco under the leadership of the Rev. Anthony Maraschi, S.J. From the days of these small beginnings the zeal of those charged with the education of Catholic youth has been untiring, progress has been steady, and the results already achieved have more than compensated for the sacrifices and expenditures which the work entailed. The following figures for the year 1907 will give some idea of the importance of Catholic education in California: 1 archdiocesan seminary, 5 seminaries of religious orders, 1 normal school, 11 colleges, academies and high schools for boys, 47 academies for girls, 73 parochial schools, 31,814 young people under Catholic care . Besides the institutions just mentioned there are numerous orphan asylums, industrial school, infant asylums, day homes and a protectory for boys to which is attached a boys' industrial farm at Rutherford. In addition to the colleges in charge of the Jesuits already mentioned, the Christian Brothers conduct Sacred Heart College in San Francisco, and St. Mary's College in Oakland. St. Vincent's College, in Los Angeles, is under the care of the Vincentian Fathers. There are several other universities and colleges, as well as numerous grammar, primary and secondary schools and kindergartens, under private management.
The origin of the name California has been the subject of some conjecture; but certain it is that by the end of the sixteenth century it was applied to all the territory claimed by the Spanish Crown, bordering on the Pacific Ocean and lying north of Cape San Lucas. In a much later day it came to designate, under the familiar phrase, "The Two Californias", the territory now included in the State of California, and the Peninsula of Lower California. After Florida, California is the oldest name of any of the United States. The land was discovered by the Spaniards--Lower California by Cortez who visited the peninsula in 1533; and Alta or Upper California by Cabrillo, in 1542. Lower California had been evangelized by the Jesuits who established eighteen missions between 1697 and 1767. Upon the expulsion of the Jesuits in the latter year, the care of the missions and the conversion of the Indians in the Spanish settlements were entrusted to the Franciscans. To them therefore belongs the honour of founding the great mission system of California proper. The leader of this gigantic work was the renowned Father Junípero Serra, and his first settlement in California was the mission of San Diego, which he established in July, 1769. San Francisco was founded in 1776. For fifteen years the saintly man laboured in California with apostolic zeal, and at the time of his death in 1784, he established nine missions between San Diego and San Francisco. The total number of missions founded in California by the Franciscans was twenty-one, and they extended from Sonoma in the north to San Diego in the south. Prominent among them were Santa Clara, San Luis, Obispo, Santa Barbara, and San Juan Capistrano. The missions were all established under the sovereignty of the King of Spain; each mission had its church, a residence for the fathers, a presidio, or military guard, and shops and workrooms for the Indians, who, besides receiving instruction in the Faith, were taught the useful arts of civilization. (See CALIFORNIA MISSIONS.) Each mission was established in conjunction with a Spanish settlement under a civil governor, and during this period, the immigration was almost exclusively Spanish and Mexican. In 1822 California ceased to be a Spanish colony and became part of the territory of Mexico. From that date begins the decline of the missions; the policy of the government became one of annoyance, interference, and aggression. Finally, in 1834, began the secularization of the missions, which was in fact their downright confiscation. The Fathers were deprived of their lands and buildings; and the Indians freed from the benevolent government of the friars.
The results were disastrous. The Indians were scattered and dispersed, and many of them lapsed into barbarism. The missions themselves were destroyed. This confiscation forms one of the saddest injustices in history. The temporal wrongs done at this time were partially righted in 1902 by the award of the International Tribunal of Arbitration at The Hague, in the case of the Pious Fund, which adjudged the payment by Mexico to the United States for the Catholic Church in California, of the accrued interest of the Fund. When taken over by President Santa Anna in 1842, the total value of the Pious Fund estates was estimated at $1,700,000. In 1826 the first emigrant train of Americans entered the present territory of California. From that year onward there was a gradual influx of Americans, most of whom engaged in trading, hunting, prospecting, cattle-raising, and farming. As the American population increased there were frequent misunderstandings and clashes with the Mexican authorities, some of them not altogether creditable to the Americans. Commodore Jones made an unauthorized seizure of Monterey in 1842. The United States Government subsequently disavowed his acts and made apologies to Mexico.
In 1846 a party of Americans seized Sonoma, captured the commandant, and proclaimed the independence of the Republic of California. The young republic chose the Bear Flag as its emblem. In a few weeks news was received of hostilities between the United States and Mexico; the Bear Flag gave place to the American Flag; and Monterey, San Francisco, Sonoma, and Sutter's Fort were soon in the hands of the Americans. California was finally ceded to the United States, on the conclusion of the war with Mexico, by the Treaty of Guadeloupe Hidalgo, proclaimed 4 July, 1848. In January, 1848, gold was discovered by James W. Coloma, on the American River. The news spread like wildfire, and by the early part of 1849 a mighty tide of immigration had set in. The gold-seekers came from every section of the United States, and from Europe. In that year more than 80,000 men arrived in California. These men were afterwards called the "Forty-niners". Some of them came from Australia; some, from New York and Europe by way of Cape Horn; some crossed the Isthmus of Panama; while a large number came across the plains in caravans, on horseback, and even on foot. Fortune awaited thousands of these pioneers in the rich placer mines, and California became the richest gold-producing State in the United States. But thousands of those who were unsuccessful in their quest for gold, found even greater and more lasting wealth in tilling the rich soil and engaging in commerce. After the excitement caused by the discovery of gold had subsided, a steady stream of immigration began, and continues to the present time. The foreign immigrants have been chiefly Irish, German, English, Canadian, Italian, and French, though there are also considerable numbers of Portuguese and Swedes. As shown in the tables already presented, more than seventy five percent of the total population in 1900 was native-born.
So rapid was the growth of population after the discovery of gold, that in 1849 a constitution was adopted by the convention at Monterey, and California was admitted into the Union of States by Act of Congress on 9 September, 1850. That day has ever since been a legal holiday, and is generally celebrated and referred to as Admission Day. Peter H. Burnett was elected first governor of the new state and served during 1851 and 1852. All sorts of men found their way into the new El Dorado, as it was called. Most of them were hardy, industrious, and honest--these were the true pioneers. But there was a considerable admixture of the reckless and daredevil element, criminals and desperadoes, who sought fortune and adventure in the new gold diggings. In 1851 there was a veritable carnival of crime in San Francisco which the lawfully constituted authorities were unable to suppress. The citizens of the city organized themselves into a Vigilance Committee and punished crimes and criminals in summary fashion. The members of the committee were known as "Vigilantes", and were for the most part honest and reputable men, who resorted to these measures only from motives of necessity and duty, in the disturbed condition of the government. A similar condition arose again in 1856 and was met by the same remedy. It must be said that the trials of the Vigilance Committee, while informal, were in the main fair, and the punishments inflicted richly deserved.
Large numbers of Chinese coolies had emigrated to California ever since 1850; the influx was greatest during the building of the Central Pacific Railroad which was completed in 1869. A strong anti-Chinese sentiment developed, due chiefly to three principal objections made against them: they worked for wages much lower than white men; they spent little of their earnings; they rarely established homes, but lived together in large numbers and in unclean surroundings. The agitation grew to tremendous proportions, provoked serious riots, and finally resulted in the so-called Chinese exclusion acts which have been enacted periodically by Congress since 1882. There were at one time over 100,000 Chinese in California. In 1900 the number had decreased to 45,753; and it is now (1907) much smaller. In 1891 the Australian Ballot was introduced at State elections. Among other important political events of the last twenty-five years was the prohibition of hydraulic mining, which had destroyed immense areas for agriculture and had choked up river beds with the accumulation of detritus; also the passage of numerous beneficial laws for the promotion of irrigation, for the fumigation of fruit trees, and for the importation of predatory insects for the purpose of destroying insect pests. The present constitution of California was adopted in 1879. During the Spanish-American War and the subsequent American occupation of the Philippines, San Francisco has been the chief depot for the transportation of troops and supplies. On 18 April, 1906, one of the greatest earthquakes recorded in history visited the coast of California; it was most severe in San Francisco. Fire started simultaneously in a dozen quarters and burned incessantly for three days. All but the western and southern parts of the city were consumed. The city, as a city, was destroyed. The loss of life is estimated at 500, and of property at $500,000,000. More than 300,000 people left the city after the fire. Over 200,000 of these have returned, and incredible strides have been made in rehabilitating the city. Nearly $200,000,000 have been expended (December, 1907) on improvements in the 497 city blocks that were destroyed.
The territory of the State of California is divided, ecclesiastically, into the Archdiocese of San Francisco, the Diocese of Monterey and Los Angeles, and the Diocese of Sacramento. The first includes the city of San Francisco and the central and more westerly counties of the State. The second includes all of Southern California. The third embraces the entire northern part of the State, as well as nearly half of the State of Nevada. With the exception of the Diocese of Sacramento, their boundaries are conterminous with those of the State. The Diocese of Salt Lake, in Utah, and the Dioceses of Sacramento and of Monterey and Los Angeles are suffragan to the Archdiocese of San Francisco. The Catholic population of California is estimated at 344,000 (1906), made up as follows: Archdiocese of San Francisco, 227,000; Diocese of Sacramento, 42,000; Diocese of Monterey and Los Angeles, 75,000. By far the greater portion of these are white, the total of blacks, Indians, and Chinese being less than five percent.
From 1769, the year which saw the foundation of San Diego, until the second expedition of Fremont (1846), the settlers and immigrants were chiefly Catholic, being natives of Spain and Mexico. The discovery of gold in 1848 was immediately followed by an inrush of thousands of immigrants. These gold-seekers were mostly Americans, but there was also a large proportion of foreigners. From that time until the present, the immigration has been steadily on the increase, the Catholic part of it being chiefly Irish, Irish-American, Italian, French, and German.
The first governor of California, Peter H. Burnett, was a convert to the Catholic Faith. Stephen M. White, who represented California in the Senate of the United States, was one of the first graduates of the Jesuit college at Santa Clara. He was an astute lawyer, a brilliant orator, and a tireless worker. E. W. McKinstry, like Judge Burnett, was a convert to the Faith; and like him, also, was a member of the Supreme Bench. Judge McKinstry was a man of deep erudition, a fine constitutional lawyer, and an exemplary Catholic. W. G. Lorigan, a Catholic, was also chosen to the Supreme Bench. Joseph McKenna, another California Catholic, became a Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States (1898), and James F. Smith, General in the United States Army, Member of the Philippine Commission, and Governor-General of the Philippine Islands, is another alumnus of Santa Clara College. Garret W. McEnerney, one of the leaders of the California Bar, who won international fame by his masterful presentation of the claims of the Catholic Church in California to the Pious Fund (q.v.) before the Tribunal Arbitration at The Hague in 1902, graduated at St. Mary's College.
The following statistics of the Catholic Church in California are taken from the Catholic Directory for 1907: archbishop, 1; bishops, 2; total priests, 488; secular, 321; religious, 167; total churches, 366; churches with resident priests, 209; missions with churches, 157; stations, 119; seminary, 1; seminaries of religious orders, 5; colleges and academies for boys, 11; academies for young ladies, 47; parishes with parochial schools, 73; orphan asylums, 12; total young people under Catholic care, 31,814; Catholic population, 344,000. There are houses or monasteries of Jesuits, Dominicans, Franciscans, Paulists, Marists, Selesians, Christian Brothers, and Brothers of Mary. The Catholic sisterhoods are almost all represented.
The total number of churches was 1505; total value of church property, $11,961,914; total number of communicants, 280,619. Of course, these figures have been greatly increased since that time. Catholics do not recognize any such enumeration as "communicants"; the total for this head therefore underestimates the Catholic population.
|Denomination||Organization||Churches||Value of church property||Number of communicants|
The constitutional provision safeguarding religious freedom is ample and specific. It reads as follows: "The free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and worship, without discrimination or preference, shall be forever guaranteed by this State; and no person shall be rendered incompetent to be a witness or juror on account of his opinions on matters of religious belief; but the liberty of conscience hereby secured shall not be so construed as to excuse acts of licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace or safety of this State." The Constitution prohibits the appropriation of money from the State treasury for the use or benefit of any corporation, association, asylum, hospital, or any other institution not under the exclusive management and control of the State as a State institution. But there is, nevertheless, a proviso authorizing the granting of State aid to institutions conducted for the support of maintenance of "minor orphans, or half-orphans, or abandoned children, or aged persons in indigent circumstances". The Constitution also expressly prohibits the appropriation of money in support of any sectarian creed, church, or school. The policy of the State is to afford the fullest measure of religious liberty to all, to discriminate in favour of, or against, no one on account of religious belief, and not to permit the power or resources of the State to be used for the propagation of any form of religion or for the benefit of any religious institution. Every Sunday is by express legislative enactment a legal holiday (Civil Code, 7); on that day all courts are closed, and business is universally suspended. Any act required by law or contract to be done or performed on a particular day which happens to fall on a Sunday, may be done or performed on the next day with full legal effect. But there is no law compelling the religious observance of Sunday, and contracts, deeds, wills, notes, etc. executed on Sunday are just as valid as if executed on any other day. But, while there is no Sunday Law, properly so-called, there is an act of the legislature passed 27 February, 1893, securing to all employees one day's rest in seven, and making it a misdemeanor to violate the provisions of the act.
The Code of Civil Procedure provides that "every court, every judge or clerk of any court, every justice and every notary public, and every officer or person authorized to take testimony in any action or proceeding, or to decide upon evidence, has power to administer oaths or affirmations". Any person who desires it may, at his option, instead of taking an oath, make his affirmation. The Bible is not used in administering oaths; in judicial proceedings, the witness raises his right hand and the clerk or judge swears him "to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God". To make a willfully false statement after having taken an oath or affirmation, before an officer authorized to administer it, to testify to the truth, is perjury, a felony punishable by imprisonment in the State's prison for from one to fourteen years. The Penal Code makes it a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $200 or imprisonment for ninety days, to utter profane language in the presence or hearing of women and children (Penal Code, sect. 415). The Supreme Court of the State, in the case of Delaney, ex parte, California Reports, Vol. XLIII, page 478, has held it to be within the power of a municipal corporation empowered by its charter to prohibit practices which are against good morals, to prohibit and punish the utterance of profane language. The entire matter of profane language is generally left to the control of the local authorities, and most of the counties and cities have ordinances prohibiting and punishing it. It is customary to open the sessions of the legislature with prayer, though there is no provision of law either requiring or prohibiting the practice. There is no recognition of any religious holidays, by name, except Sunday. New Years' Day and Christmas are both holidays, but they are described in the Civil Code merely as "the first day of January. . .and the twenty-fifth day of December". It must be said that the same rule is observed in the Code in referring to the other legal holidays. Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, etc. are simply the twenty-second day of February, the thirtieth day of May, the fourth day of July, etc. The seal of confession has the full sanction and protection of the law. It occupies the same position in the eyes of the law as communications made to attorneys and physicians in their professional capacities. It is the policy of the law to encourage these confidential or privileged communications, as they are called, and to keep them inviolate. Section 1881 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that a priest cannot be examined as to any confession made to him, as such, by a penitent.
The laws governing the incorporation of churches, and religious societies and providing for the protection and management of church property are both beneficent and effective. The Civil Code (section 602) provides that any bishop, chief priest, or presiding elder, may become a sole corporation by complying with certain simple legal formalities. Thereafter, the usual attributes of corporation aggregate attach, mutatis mutandis, to the corporation sole. Under this statute all Catholic Church property in the Archdiocese of San Francisco is held in the name of "The Roman Catholic Archbishop of San Francisco", a corporation sole. Upon the death of the incumbent, his successor, properly appointed and qualified, takes the place of his predecessor, and no probate or other proceedings are required to vest the title to the church property which, in contemplation of law, remains always in the corporation sole, regardless of who may be, for the time being, the incumbent. In addition to the laws governing corporations sole, there are very liberal statutes authorizing the incorporation of single churches, as well as of religious, charitable, and educational associations, and the holding of property by such corporations; also authorizing the consolidation of two or more churches or parishes into one corporation. Under the law of California, therefore, the property interests of the church are jealously safeguarded, and she is free to hold her church property in either of the methods above pointed out. Prior to the year 1900, California stood alone among the States of the Union in taxing church property in the same manner and at the same rate as business or residence property. On 6 November, 1900, the people of the State adopted an amendment to the Constitution, providing that "all buildings, and so much of the real property on which they are situated as may be required for the convenient use and occupation of said buildings, when the same are used solely and exclusively for religious worship, shall be free from taxation". The residences of the clergy, the hospitals, orphanages, refuges, asylums, and all other institutions which are devoted to charitable or eleemosynary objects, but which are not used "solely and exclusively for religious worship", are still subject to taxation as before. The law exempts "ministers of religion" from military duty; and "a minister of the gospel, or a priest of any denomination following his profession" is exempt from jury duty.
The Civil Code defines marriage as "a personal relation arising out of a civil contract, to which the consent of parties capable of making that contract is necessary. Consent alone will not constitute marriage; it must be followed by a solemnization authorized by this code" (55). This section of the code formerly permitted "a mutual assumption of marital rights, duties or obligations" to take the place of a solemnization. In other words, the so-called common-law marriages were permitted, and their validity upheld, by the laws of the State. But the difficulty of determining just what constituted "a mutual assumption of marital rights, duties or obligations", and the numerous and scandalous cases of intrigue, temporary or illicit relations, hasty, ill-advised, and clandestine unions, with their consequent perplexing questions of legitimacy, succession, property rights, and the status of the parties themselves, convinced the leading minds of California that the position of the Catholic Church on the necessity of the public safeguards with which she protects the marriage ceremony, is the only wise and safe one. Accordingly, in 1895, the legislature amended the law, and made it necessary that the consent of the parties to the marriage be evidenced by a solemnization of the marriage. No particular form of solemnization is required, but the parties must declare in the presence of the person solemnizing the marriage that they take each other as husband and wife. Marriages may be solemnized by a priest, or a minister of any denomination, or by a justice or judge of any court. A license must first be obtained, and the person solemnizing the marriage must attach his written certificate to the license, certifying to the fact, the time, and the place of, and the names and residences of the parties and the witnesses to, the marriage. The license and certificate must then be recorded with the County Recorder. Under these stringent rules little or no difficulty is found in proving a marriage; and all relations between the sexes are simply meretricious unless the parties avail themselves of the legal requirements of solemnization of marriage. There is a charitable provision of the law, designed for the benefit of innocent offspring, to the effect that all children of a marriage void in law or dissolved by divorce are legitimate. The age of consent to marriage is eighteen in males and fifteen in females; but if the male be under the age of twenty-one, or the female under the age of eighteen, the consent of parents or guardian must first be obtained. The law of the State forbids and makes absolutely void marriages: (1) Between whites and negroes, mongolians, or mulattoes; (2) Between ancestors and descendants, brothers and sisters, uncles and nieces, aunts and nephews (marriages between cousins are permitted); (3) If either party be already married, for one year after the entry of an interlocutory decree of divorce. The annulment of marriages is provided for in certain cases; such marriages are considered voidable and may be annulled for any of the following causes: (1) If, at the time of the marriage, either party be under the age of consent, and the consent of parents or guardian be not obtained; (2) If either party be of unsound mind at the time of the marriage; (3) If consent of the marriage be obtained by fraud; or (4) By force, or (5) If either party be physically incapable of entering into the marriage state. The annulment of marriage must carefully be distinguished from divorce. The latter implies the existence of a perfectly valid marriage. The former affords relief to the injured party, who may either ratify the marriage, and thus make it valid from the beginning, or have it set aside and declared void from the beginning.
The principle of divorce is recognized by the law of California, which assigns six grounds of divorce: adultery, extreme cruelty, willful desertion, willful neglect (failure to provide), habitual intemperance, and conviction of a felony. Notwithstanding that a cause for divorce be proved to exist, the divorce must be denied upon proof of any of the following: connivance, collusion, condonation, recrimination (proof of a cause of divorce against the plaintiff), or lapse of time. To prevent fraudulent and secret divorces, as well as the promiscuous granting of divorces, the law requires a bona fide residence by the plaintiff for one year in the State, and for three months in the county, before filing suit. Upon dissolution of the marriage by divorce, the Superior Court has jurisdiction to award the care and custody of the children to the innocent party, or to make such other provision for their care and custody as the best interests of the children, both moral and material, may require; and this disposition may be altered from time to time in the discretion of the Court.
In 1903 the law on the subject of divorce was amended. Since that year, upon proof by the plaintiff of a cause for divorce, an interlocutory decree of divorce is granted. This decree entitles the successful party to a final decree of divorce upon the expiration of one year after the entry of the interlocutory decree. This change in the law prevents the remarriage of either of the parties until the expiration of one year from the entry of the interlocutory decree.
As previously explained, the Church receives no financial aid from the State towards the religious education of her children, and here, as elsewhere, Catholics are taxed for the support of public schools, as well as charged with the duty of maintaining schools of their own. Here also, as elsewhere, the effects of the public school system of non-religous education emphasize the necessity of providing for Catholic youth a complete system of education that includes, with the best profane scholarship, a sound moral and religious training. The need is especially felt in the university courses, whose systems of philosophy, if not positively anti-Christian, are certainly not calculated to foster belief in a personal God, or to strengthen faith in a Divine revelation. There are liberal statutes in force, permitting and encouraging the foundation and maintenance of private institutions of learning, and the only interference permitted the State authorities concerns the supervision of sanitary arrangements, and the prescribing of such standards of scholarship as will entitle graduates to admission to the State University without examination.
There are also liberal statutes authorizing the incorporation of religious, social, benevolent, or charitable organizations. Such corporations may make and enforce rules for the government of themselves and their institutions, and may purchase and hold such real property as may be necessary for the objects of the association, not exceeding six whole lots in any city or town, or fifty acres in the country, and the annual profit or income of such land must not exceed $50,000. Orphan asylums, however, maintaining at least 100 orphans are permitted to purchase and hold 160 acres of land, of a net annual value of not more than $50,000. These provisions, it must be remembered, do not limit the power of purely religious corporations, whether sole or aggregate, to purchase and hold such lands as may be necessary for their churches, hospitals, schools, colleges, orphan asylums, and parsonages, under statutes previously discussed. The State Constitution prohibits the appropriating of public money "for the support of any sectarian or denominational school, or any school not under the exclusive control of the officers of the public schools"; it also provides that no "sectarian or denominational be taught, or instruction thereon be permitted, directly or indirectly, in any of the common schools of the State". Under another constitutional provision already discussed, the legislature passed a law in 1880 appropriating annually to every institution maintaining orphans the sum of $100 for each orphan, and $75 for each half orphan. In 1903 the legislature created a State Board of Charities and Correction, consisting of six members appointed by the governor. This board has a supervisory jurisdiction over all charitable, correctional, and penal institutions, including hospitals for the insane.
There is no State law forbidding the sale of liquor to citizens generally. But it is forbidden: to bring intoxicating liquor to a prison, jail, or reformatory; or to sell, give, or expose it for sale within half a mile to a State prison, or within 1,900 feet of a reformatory, or within one mile of the University of California at Berkeley, or within one an one-half miles of any veteran's home, or within the State Capitol, or on the grounds adjacent thereto; or at a camp meeting; or to a common or habitual drunkard; or to an Indian; or to a minor under the age of eighteen years; or within one mile of an insane asylum. It is forbidden to permit a minor under the age of eighteen years to enter a saloon; and it is also forbidden to give or sell intoxicating liquor to anyone on election day. Beyond these provisions, the general law leaves the control of the sale of liquor entirely to local authority. Each county, city, and town is free to regulate the liquor traffic to suit the wishes of its citizens.
There are two State prisons, situated respectively at San Quentin and Folsom. These prisons, under the Constitution, are subject to the direct control of the State Board of Prison Directors, consisting of five members appointed by the governor. The prisoners are kept at work, in the rock-crushing plant, in making grain bags, in building roads, etc. Priests and ministers are free to visit the prisoners and conduct religious services for their benefit. There are two State reformatories for juvenile offenders--the Preston School of Industry at Ione City, and the Whittier State School, at Whittier. Each is governed by its own board of trustees, and is entirely independent of the Board of Prison Directors. There is also a juvenile court charged with the control and punishment of juvenile dependents and delinquents. A large discretion is vested with the judge of this court and much good has been accomplished since its creation in keeping children of Catholic parentage under the care and influence of conscientious Catholic officers.
In California every person of sound mind who has reached the age of eighteen years may dispose of his entire estate by will, subject to the payment of his debts and expenses of administration. Such part of a decedent's estate as is not disposed of by will is distributed according to the statutes of succession. The estates of such persons as die without wills and without heirs escheat to the State. The phrase "expenses of administration" includes funeral expenses of the deceased, expenses of his last illness, and provision for the support of his family, including the homestead, family allowance, and setting apart property exempt from execution.
No person is permitted to dispose by will of more than one-third of the value of his estate to charitable uses. A will attempting to dispose of a greater proportion to charity would not be absolutely void, but all the charitable bequests and devises would be reduced proportionately so that their total value would not exceed one third. Moreover, every charitable bequest and devise is absolutely void unless it be made at least thirty days prior to the testator's death. A bequest or devise to a church as such, or to a college, orphan asylum, missionary society, hospital, or home for the aged would be for a charitable use under this provision. But not so a devise or bequest to a priest or bishop by name, and in his individual capacity. It has also been held that a bequest to a priest for Masses to be offered for the repose of the soul of the deceased, is not a charitable bequest.
Cemeteries may be purchased, held, and owned under the liberal statutes for the ownership of church property, already explained. Or, they may be purchased, held, and owned by cemetery corporations formed under a general law, by which their land holdings are limited to 320 acres situated in the county in which their articles of incorporation are filed, or in an adjoining county. The law provides for the survey and subdivision of such lands into lots or plots, avenues or walks, and for the government of such corporations, as well as the sale and tenure of burial plots.
CLINCH, California and Its Missions (San Francisco, 1904); JAMES, In and Out of the Old Missions (Boston, 1906); JACKSON, California and the Missions (Boston, 1903); BURNETT, Recollections of an Old Pioneer; EDWORDS, California Annual (San Francisco, 1907); U. S. Census of 1900 (Washington); U. S. Census of 1890 (Washington); SWETT, History of the Public School System of California (San Francisco, 1876); Catholic Directory for 1907 (Milwaukee); Twenty-second Biennial Report of the Superintendent of Public Instruction (Sacramento, 1906); University of California Register (Berkeley, 1907); BABCOCK, History of California (Sacramento, 1907); TREADWELL, Constitution of California (San Francisco, 1907); Civil Code, Code of Civil Procedure, Political Code, Penal Code (San Francisco, 1906).
APA citation. (1908). California. In The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03170a.htm
MLA citation. "California." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. <http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/03170a.htm>.
Transcription. This article was transcribed for New Advent by Matthew and Therese Reak. Dedicated to my friends, the Ottles.
Ecclesiastical approbation. Nihil Obstat. November 1, 1908. Remy Lafort, S.T.D., Censor. Imprimatur. +John Cardinal Farley, Archbishop of New York.
Contact information. The editor of New Advent is Kevin Knight. My email address is feedback732 at newadvent.org. (To help fight spam, this address might change occasionally.) Regrettably, I can't reply to every letter, but I greatly appreciate your feedback — especially notifications about typographical errors and inappropriate ads.

Battle of the Boyne
The Battle of the Boyne was a turning point in the Williamite war in Ireland, between the deposed King James VII of Scotland and II of England and his son-in-law and successor, William III ("William of Orange"), for the English, Scottish, and Irish thrones. It took place on July 1, 1690 (Old Style date), just outside of the town of Drogheda on Ireland's east coast. As a consequence of the adoption of the Gregorian calendar, the battle is now commemorated on July 12.
Though not militarily decisive, its symbolic importance has made it one of the most infamous battles in British and Irish history and a key part in Irish Protestant folklore. It is still commemorated today, principally by the Orange Order. Irish Protestants have cast the battle as one between William the representative of Christ and the forces of darkness. Their victory meant that the Protestants had "won" Ireland, and it justified their ascendancy.
King William's victory was followed by systematic efforts to Protestantize Ireland with Protestant settlers and legal restrictions on the rights of Catholics. However, this was but a chapter in a continuing process of what was called the "pacification" of Ireland, beginning with Pope Adrian IV's bull that granted Ireland to England and Henry II's invasion of 1171. This process led to the establishment of a Protestant majority in the province of Ulster, most of which became Northern Ireland in 1921, and where conflict between Catholic and Protestants, known as the "troubles," led to British military intervention in between 1969 and 1997.
A sectarian battle
The battle of the Boyne was the decisive encounter in a war that was primarily about James's attempt to regain the thrones of England and Scotland, but is widely remembered as a decisive moment in the struggle between Protestant and Catholic factions in Ireland. However, recent analyses have played down the religious aspect of the conflict. In fact, both armies were religiously mixed, and William of Orange's own elite force—the Dutch Blue Guards—had the papal banner with them on the day, many of the Guardsmen being Dutch Catholics. They were part of the League of Augsburg, a cross-Christian alliance designed to stop a French conquest of Europe, supported by the Vatican. The war in Ireland was also the beginning of a long-running but ultimately unsuccessful campaign by James's supporters, the Jacobites, to restore the Stuart dynasty rule to the British thrones. While most Jacobites in Ireland were indeed Catholics, many English and Scottish Jacobites were Protestants and were motivated by loyalty to the principle of monarchy (considering James to have been illegally deposed in a coup) or to the Stuart dynasty in particular, rather than by religion. A handful of British Jacobites fought with James at the Boyne. In addition, some of the French regiments fighting with the Jacobites at the Boyne were composed of German Protestants. In a European context, therefore, the battle was not a religiously motivated one, but part of a complicated political, dynastic, and strategic conflict.
In an Irish context, however, the war was a sectarian and ethnic conflict, in many ways a re-run of the Irish Confederate Wars of 50 years earlier. For Irish Jacobites, the war was fought for Irish sovereignty, religious toleration for Catholicism, and land ownership. The Irish Catholic upper classes had lost almost all their lands after Cromwell's conquest and had also lost the right to hold public office, practice their religion, and to sit in the Irish Parliament. They saw the reign of the Catholic King James as a means of redressing these grievances and to secure the autonomy of Ireland from the English Parliament. To these ends, under Richard Talbot, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell they had raised an army to restore James to his throne after the Glorious Revolution. By 1690, they controlled all of Ireland except for the Northern province of Ulster. Most of James II's troops at the Boyne were Irish Catholics.
Conversely, for Williamites in Ireland, the war was about maintaining Protestant and British rule in Ireland. The Irish Williamites were mainly Protestant settlers from England and Scotland who had come to the country during the Plantations of Ireland. They were a majority in the northern province of Ulster. They feared for both their lives and their property if James and his Catholic supporters were allowed to rule Ireland. In particular, they feared a repeat of the Irish Rebellion of 1641, when there had been widespread massacres of Protestants. For these reasons, the Protestant settler community fought en masse for William III. Many of the Williamite troops at the Boyne, including their very effective irregular cavalry, were Protestants from Ulster, who called themselves "Eniskilleners" and were referred to by contemporaries as "Scotch-Irish."
The competing sides
The opposing armies in the battle were led by the Roman Catholic King James of England, Scotland and Ireland and opposing him, his son-in-law the Protestant William III ("William of Orange"), who had deposed James from his English and Scottish thrones in the previous year. James' supporters still controlled much of Ireland and the Irish Parliament. James also enjoyed the support of the French King, Louis XIV, who did not want to see a hostile monarch, such as William, on the throne of England. To support James' restoration, Louis sent 6000 French troops to Ireland to support the Irish Jacobites. William was already Stadtholder of the Netherlands and was able to call on Dutch and allied troops from continental Europe as well as from Great Britain.
James was a seasoned general who had proven his bravery when fighting for his brother—King Charles II—in Europe, notably at the battle of the Dunes in 1658. However, recent historians have noted that he was prone to panicking under pressure and to making rash decisions. William was also a seasoned commander and able general but had yet to win a full battle. Many of his battles ended in bloody stalemates, prompting at least one modern historian to argue that William lacked an ability to manage armies in the thick of battle. William's success against the French had been reliant upon tactical maneuvers and good diplomacy rather than force. His diplomacy had assembled the League of Augsburg—a multi-national coalition formed to resist French aggression in Europe. From William's point of view, his takeover of power in England and the ensuing campaign in Ireland was just another front in the war against Louis XIV of France.
James II's subordinate commanders were Richard Talbot, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell, who was the Lord Deputy of Ireland and James's most powerful supporter in that country; and the French general Lauzun. William's second in command was the Frederick Schomberg, 1st Duke of Schomberg, a 75 year old professional soldier. He had formerly been a Marshal of France, but had been expelled in 1685, from his native country by Louis XIV because he was a Huguenot Protestant.
The Williamite army at the Boyne was about 36,000 strong, composed of troops from many countries. Around 20,000 had been in Ireland since 1689, commanded by Schomberg. William himself arrived with 16,000 more in June 1690. William's troops were in general far better trained and equipped than were those of James. The best Williamite infantry were from Denmark and the Netherlands, professional soldiers equipped with the latest flintlock muskets. There were also a large contingent of French Huguenot troops fighting with the Williamites. William did not have a high opinion of his British troops, with the exception of the Ulster Protestant irregulars who had held Ulster in the previous year. The English and Scottish troops were felt to be politically unreliable, since James had been their legitimate monarch up to a year before. Moreover, they had only been raised recently and had seen little combat. The Jacobites were 23,500 strong. James had several regiments of French troops, but most of his manpower was provided by Irish Catholics. The Jacobite's Irish cavalry, who were raised from among the dispossessed Irish gentry, proved themselves to be high caliber troops at the battle. However, the Irish infantry, predominantly peasants who had been pressed into service, were not trained soldiers. They had been hastily trained, badly supplied, and only a minority of them had functional muskets. In fact, some of them at the Boyne carried only farm implements, such as scythes. On top of that, the Jacobite infantry who had firearms were all equipped with the obsolete matchlock musket.
William had landed in Carrickfergus in Ulster on June 14, 1690, and marched south to take Dublin. It has been argued that the Jacobites should have tried to block this advance in rugged country around Newry, on the present day Irish border. However, James only fought a delaying action there and chose instead to place his line of defense on the Boyne river, around 50 km from Dublin. The Williamites reached the Boyne on June 29. The day before the battle, William himself had a narrow escape, when he was wounded by Jacobite artillery while surveying the fords over which his troops would cross the river.
The battle itself was fought on July 1, over a ford of the Boyne at Oldbridge, near Drogheda. William sent about a quarter of his men to cross at a place called Roughgrange, near Slane, about 10 km from Oldbridge. The Duke of Schomberg's son, Meinhardt Schomberg, later the 3rd Duke led this crossing, which was unsuccessfully opposed by Irish dragoons. James panicked when he saw that he might be outflanked and sent half his troops, along with most of his cannon to counter this move. What neither side had realized was that there was a deep ravine at Roughgrange, so that the forces there could not engage each other, but literally sat out the battle. The Williamites there went on a long detour march which, late in the day, almost saw them cut off the Jacobite retreat at the village of Naul.
At the main ford at Oldbridge, William's infantry led by the elite Dutch Blue Guards forced their way across the river, using their superior firepower to slowly drive back the enemy foot-soldiers, but were pinned down by the counter-attacks of the Jacobite cavalry. Having secured the village of Oldbridge, some Williamite infantry held off successive cavalry attacks with disciplined volley fire while others were driven into the river. William's second in command, the Duke of Schomberg, and George Walker (1645-1690) were killed in this phase of the battle. The Williamites were not able to resume their advance until their own horsemen managed to cross the river and, after being badly mauled, held off the Jacobite cavalry, who retired and regrouped at Donore, where they once again put up stiff resistance before retiring. The Jacobites retired in good order. William had a chance to trap the retreating Jacobites as they crossed the river Nanny at Duleek, but was held up by a successful Jacobite rear-guard.
The casualty figure of the battle was quite low for a battle of such a scale—of the 50,000 or so participants, about 2,000 died, three quarters of whom were Jacobites. The reason for the low death toll was that in contemporary warfare, most of the casualties tended to be inflicted in the pursuit of an already-beaten enemy. This did not happen at the Boyne because the counter-attacks of the Jacobite cavalry screened the retreat of the rest of their army. The Jacobites were badly demoralized by their defeat, however, and many of the Irish infantrymen deserted. The Williamites triumphantly marched into Dublin two days after the battle. The Jacobite army abandoned the city and marched to Limerick, behind the river Shannon, where they were besieged. James left so quickly that he outpaced the messenger that was sent to warn Limerick of the defeat.
After his defeat, James quickly returned to exile in France, even though his army left the field relatively unscathed. James's loss of nerve and speedy exit from the battlefield enraged his Irish supporters, who fought on until the Treaty of Limerick in 1691.
The battle was overshadowed in its time in Great Britain by the destruction of the Anglo-Dutch fleet by the French two days later, off Beachy Head, a far more serious event in the short term; only on the Continent was the Boyne treated as a major victory. The reason for this was that it was the first proper victory for the League of Augsburg, the first ever alliance between Catholic and Protestant countries, and in achieving this William of Orange and Pope Alexander VIII (its prime movers) scotched the myth—particularly emanating from Sweden—that such an alliance was blasphemous, resulting in more joining the alliance and in effect ending the very real danger of a French conquest of Europe.
The Boyne was not without strategic significance on both Great Britain and Ireland, however. It marked the end of James's hope of regaining his throne by military means and virtually assured the triumph of the Glorious Revolution. In Scotland, news of this defeat led to the Highlanders gradually abandoning the Jacobite Rising which Bonnie Dundee had led. In Ireland, the Boyne was the beginning of the Williamite victory over the Jacobites, which maintained British and Protestant dominance over the country. For this reason, the Boyne is still celebrated by the Protestant Orange Order on the twelfth of July.
Commemoration of the battle
Originally, Irish Protestants commemorated the Battle of Aughrim on the July 12, as symbolizing their victory in the Williamite war in Ireland. At Aughrim, which took place a year after the Boyne, virtually all of the old native Irish Catholic and Old English aristocracies plantations under Elizabeth I and Oliver Cromwell) were wiped out. The Boyne, which in the old Julian calendar, took place on July 1, was treated as less important, third in commemorative value after Aughrim and the anniversary of the Irish Rebellion of 1641 on October 23. What was celebrated on the twelfth was not William's "victory over popery at the Battle of the Boyne," but the extermination of the elite of the native Irish at Aughrim, thereby ending the fear of having to surrender the planted lands.
In 1752, a new Gregorian calendar was introduced to the United Kingdom, which placed the Boyne on July 12, instead of Aughrim. However, even after this date, "The Twelfth" still commemorated Aughrim. But after the Orange Order was founded in 1795, amid sectarian violence in Armagh, the focus of parades on July 12, switched to the battle of the Boyne. Usually the dates before the introduction of the calendar on September 14, 1752, are mapped in English language histories directly onto the Julian dates without shifting them by 11 days. Being suspicious of anything with papist connotations, however, rather than shift the anniversary of the Boyne to the new July 1, or celebrate the new anniversary of Aughrim, the Orangemen continued to march on the July 12, which, in New Style dates marked the battle of the Boyne. Despite this, there are also smaller parades and demonstrations on July 1, the date which maps the old style date of the Boyne to the new style in the usual manner and which also commemorate the massacre of the 36th (Ulster) Division on the first day of the Battle of the Somme in 1916.
It has also been suggested that the Boyne was preferred to Aughrim because the Jacobites' rout there allowed the Irish Catholics to be presented as contemptible cowards, whereas at Aughrim they fought bravely and died in great numbers. In the context of a resurgent Irish nationalism from the 1790s onwards, it is argued that the narrative of the Boyne was more comforting for Loyalists in Ireland. The commemoration of the battle of the Boyne therefore has more to do with the politics of the Unionist community than it has to do with the military significance of the battle itself. It is not uncommon to see large murals of a monarch, William on a white horse at the head of his army marking out Loyalist territory.
The memory of the battle also has resonance among Irish Nationalists. Most Irish people see the battle as a major step on the road to the complete British colonization of Ireland. In 1923, Irish Republican Army members blew up a large monument to the battle on the battlefield site on the Boyne and also destroyed a statue of William III in 1929, that stood outside Trinity College Dublin in the center of the Irish capital.
"The Twelfth" in Ireland today
The Battle of the Boyne remains a controversial topic today, especially in Northern Ireland where Protestants remember it as a great victory over Catholics and responsible for the sovereignty of Parliament and the 'Protestant monarchy'.
In recent years "The Twelfth" has often been marked by confrontations as members of the Orange Order attempt to celebrate the date by marching past or through what they see as their traditional route. However some of these areas now have a nationalist majority, who now object to marches passing through their areas. This is mainly due to population migrations caused by institutionalized sectarianism in Northern Ireland in the mid 1900s which had made Northern Ireland, in the words of Ulster Unionist Party leader and Nobel Peace Prize winner David Trimble, a "cold house for Catholics" at the time.
Each side thus dresses up the disputes in terms of the other's supposed attempts to repress them; Catholics still see Orange Order marches as provocative attempts to 'show who is boss', while Protestants insist they have a right to "walk the Queen's highway" and see any attempt to deny them the right to walk through traditional routes used for centuries as an attempt to marginalise and restrict their freedom to celebrate their Protestant identity earned in the Glorious Revolution settlement. Thus the battle is still very present in the awareness of those involved in the Catholic-Protestant rivalry in Ireland.
The battlefield today
The site of the battle of the Boyne sprawls over a wide area west of the town of Drogheda. Oldbridge, the scene of the main Williamite crossing, has an Irish Government Interpretive Centre on it, which is dedicated to informing tourists and other visitors about the battle. This facility is currently being redeveloped. The other main combat areas on the day (at Duleek, Donore and Plattin—along the Jacobite line of retreat) are marked with tourist information signs.
- Hayes-McCoy, Gerard Anthony. Irish Battles. Harlow: Longmans, 1969. ISBN 0582112486
- Lenihan, Padraig. 1690 Battle of the Boyne. Stroud, Gloucestershire: Tempus Publishing, 2003. ISBN 0752433040
- McNally, Michael and Graham Turner. Battle of the Boyne 1690: The Irish Campaign for the English Crown. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2005. ISBN 184176891X
All links retrieved January 7, 2013.
New World Encyclopedia writers and editors rewrote and completed the Wikipedia article in accordance with New World Encyclopedia standards. This article abides by terms of the Creative Commons CC-by-sa 3.0 License (CC-by-sa), which may be used and disseminated with proper attribution. Credit is due under the terms of this license that can reference both the New World Encyclopedia contributors and the selfless volunteer contributors of the Wikimedia Foundation. To cite this article click here for a list of acceptable citing formats.The history of earlier contributions by wikipedians is accessible to researchers here:
Note: Some restrictions may apply to use of individual images which are separately licensed.

A tracheostomy (TRA-ke-OS-to-me) is a surgically made hole that goes through the front of your neck and into your trachea (TRA-ke-ah), or windpipe. The hole is made to help you breathe.
A tracheostomy usually is temporary, although you can have one long term or even permanently. How long you have a tracheostomy depends on the condition that required you to get it and your overall health.
To understand how a tracheostomy works, it helps to understand how your airways work. The airways carry oxygen-rich air to your lungs. They also carry carbon dioxide, a waste gas, out of your lungs.
The airways include your:
Air enters your body through your nose or mouth. The air travels through your voice box and down your windpipe. The windpipe splits into two bronchi that enter your lungs. (For more information, go to the Health Topics How the Lungs Work article.)
A tracheostomy provides another way for oxygen-rich air to reach your lungs, besides going through your nose or mouth. A breathing tube, also called a trach (trake) tube, is put through the tracheostomy and directly into the windpipe to help you breathe.
Doctors use tracheostomies for many reasons. One common reason is to help people who need to be on ventilators (VEN-til-a-tors) for more than a couple of weeks.
Ventilators are machines that support breathing. If you have a tracheostomy, the trach tube connects to the ventilator.
People who have conditions that interfere with coughing or block the upper airways also may need tracheostomies. Coughing is a natural reflex that protects the lungs. It helps clear mucus (a slimy substance) and bacteria from the airways. A trach tube can be used to help remove, or suction, mucus from the airways.
Doctors also might recommend tracheostomies for people who have swallowing problems due to strokes or other conditions.
Creating a tracheostomy is a fairly common, simple procedure. It's one of the most common procedures for critical care patients in hospitals.
The windpipe is located almost directly under the skin of the neck. So, a surgeon often can create a tracheostomy quickly and easily.
The procedure usually is done in a hospital operating room. However, it also can be safely done at a patient's bedside. Less often, a doctor or emergency medical technician may do the procedure in a life-threatening situation, such as at the scene of an accident or other emergency.
As with any surgery, complications can occur, such as bleeding, infection, and other serious problems. The risks often can be reduced with proper care and handling of the tracheostomy and the tubes and other related supplies.
Some people continue to need tracheostomies even after they leave the hospital. Hospital staff will teach patients and their families or caregivers how to properly care for their tracheostomies at home.
The NHLBI updates Health Topics articles on a biennial cycle based on a thorough review of research findings and new literature. The articles also are updated as needed if important new research is published. The date on each Health Topics article reflects when the content was originally posted or last revised.

Thursday June 14 2012
"Diesel exhaust fumes cause cancer": official WHO report
The Daily Mail reports a World Health Organization (WHO) warning that diesel exhaust fumes are a “major cancer risk” and belong in the “same deadly category as asbestos, arsenic and mustard gas”. Meanwhile the BBC says that diesel fumes are “definitely a cause of lung cancer”.
This widely reported news is based on a decision by the WHO to classify diesel exhausts as a cause of cancer.
The decision was taken by the WHO’s International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), a panel of experts that co-ordinates and conducts research into the causes of cancer, and develops cancer control strategies.
Under its classification scheme, diesel exhaust was previously categorised as “probably carcinogenic”. The agency now says there is now sufficient evidence that exposure to diesel fumes causes lung cancer. It is calling for exposure to diesel fumes to be reduced worldwide.
While diesel fumes are now officially carcinogenic, the alarmist tone of the Daily Mail’s headline should be viewed with caution because the ‘deadly category’ of substances the Mail describes also includes sunlight and wood dust.
What is diesel and is it used much in the UK?
Diesel oil is a complex mixture of chemicals, mainly distilled from crude oil, although vegetable oil and similar sources can be used to make ‘biodiesel’. It is used as fuel for diesel internal combustion engines, which use compressed hot air to ignite fuel (petrol engines have a spark plug to ignite the fuel).
Worldwide, diesel oil is widely used as a fuel in diesel-powered cars, lorries, trains, aircraft, ships and heavy industry. It is regarded as more efficient than petroleum, resulting in lower fuel consumption. WHO says that many people are exposed to diesel exhaust in everyday life, both through their occupations and in the ambient air.
As of 2007, just over 50% of all new car sales in the UK were diesel, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. In 2004, approximately 700 litres (150 gallons) of diesel was sold every second in the UK, according to a report by the Health Protection Agency (HPA).
The amount of pollutants from diesel exhaust fumes, in particular its sulphur content, have been reduced over the last few years, and engines on newer cars are designed to burn fuel more efficiently, reducing emissions. However, the IARC says it is not yet clear how these improvements translate into any changes in the impact of diesel fumes on human health. Existing fuels and older unmodified vehicles will take years to replace, particularly in less developed countries where regulations are less stringent, the IARC says.
What is the WHO’s classification scheme?
The WHO classifies the cancer-causing potential of various substances into four groups, depending on the evidence available in both humans and other animals:
- Group 1 is used when a substance causes cancer in humans
- Group 2A is used when a substance ‘probably’ causes cancer in humans
- Group 2B is used when a substance ‘possibly’ causes cancer in humans
- Group 3 is used when a substance is not classifiable in terms of its cancer-causing properties in humans because the evidence is inadequate
- Group 4 is used when a substance is ‘probably not’ a cause of cancer in humans
What is the WHO now saying about diesel fumes and cancer?
Since 1988, diesel oil fumes have been classified by the IARC as ‘probably carcinogenic to humans’. This category is used when there is some, limited evidence that a substance causes cancer in humans, but sufficient evidence it causes cancer in experimental animals.
However, the IARC has now reclassified diesel engine exhaust as ‘carcinogenic’ (group 1 on the list above). This category is used when there is sufficient evidence that a substance causes cancer in humans. The IARC says there is sufficient evidence that diesel exhaust is a cause of lung cancer. It is also associated with an increased risk of bladder cancer, although the evidence for the latter is more limited.
Why has the advice changed?
The WHO says there has been mounting concern in recent years about the cancer-causing potential of diesel engine exhaust, based on findings from epidemiological studies of workers exposed to diesel fumes. In particular, it cites a large cohort study, published in March this year, of occupational exposure to diesel exhaust in 12,315 US miners. The study was run by the US National Cancer Institute and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. It found that exposure to diesel exhaust increased the risk of dying from lung cancer (1.26, 95% confidence interval 1.09 to 1.44). A further case-control study, undertaken in this group (comparing 198 miners who had died from lung cancer with 562 miners who were alive at the time the ‘case’ died), found that the risk of lung cancer in these workers increased with the length of time they were exposed to diesel fumes.
Although these studies were in workers who had been heavily exposed to diesel fumes, the WHO points out that studies of other carcinogens, such as radon, indicate that initial research showing a risk in heavily exposed populations, are later found to be a risk for the general population. It says that action to reduce exposure to diesel exhaust fumes should encompass both highly exposed workers and the general population.
Are diesel fumes really as dangerous as asbestos and mustard gas?
Under the IARC classification scheme, diesel fumes now fall into the same category as all other known carcinogens (of which there are over 100 listed). These include:
- tobacco smoke (both first and secondhand)
- mustard gas
- Chinese salted fish
- vinyl chloride
- wood dust
The WHO does not specify the level of risk posed by different carcinogens, or the risk posed by different levels of exposure. However, for most carcinogens, the higher the exposure, the greater the risk of cancer.
Dr Christopher Portier, chair of the IARC working group, said that while the scientific evidence that diesel oil exhaust caused lung cancer was ‘compelling’, the impact on the wider population who are exposed to diesel fumes at much lower levels and for shorter periods of time, is unknown.
Newspaper readers of a nervous disposition may want to consider the above facts when considering the risk to their health from diesel fumes.
Analysis by Bazian. Edited by NHS Choices.

By Tom Boyle
All Things Birds Associate Naturalist
|Natco Lake was created by accident, rather than by Mother Nature. The National Fireproofing Company (Natco) mined clay here for bricks in the 1930's. Eventually the mining equipment hit underground springs and the lake filled in. A ditch was dug in an attempt to drain off the water into a nearby tidal creek. The ditching brought in salt water and made the lake brackish, as it remains today.
Birding the northern section of the lake:
Walk east along the Henry Hudson Trail and over a small bridge. Eastern Phoebe has nested under this bridge. After the bridge, turn right off the paved trail and then left. Follow the unpaved trail a short distance to a small tidal cove in the lake. On a changing tide, Yellow-crowned Night Heron is regularly seen. Both night herons nest locally and can be seen frequently. Occasionally, Diamond-backed Terrapins are seen basking on flotsam in the cove. Continue on the unpaved trail until it ends at a lawn on the lake's north side.
Scan the lake here. Shorebirds can be found in migration, along with herons, Osprey, gulls, cormorants, terns, and waterfowl. Great Black-backed Gull has begun nesting on one of the islands in the lake. Don't be surprised to see something unusual. An American White Pelican was seen on the lake in January about five years ago. I've seen American Oystercatcher, Black Skimmer, and copulating Least Terns sitting on the island in front of you. This is a good spot to check for lingering waterfowl at World Series of Birding time [mid-May]. Northern Shoveler has been seen in late May, Canvasback in late June and a drake Bufflehead has lingered here into July! Rough-winged Swallows and Belted Kingfishers have nested in the dirt banks around the lake and are often seen.
The woods along the Henry Hudson Trail are good for migrants in spring. In recent years I've seen (and heard) Acadian, Alder, and Olive-sided Flycatchers; Gray-cheeked Thrush; Mourning and Brewster's Warblers; Yellow-breasted Chat; and Lincoln's and White-crowned Sparrows. Fall is equally good, and Connecticut Warbler is regular at that time of year. If you walk the trail a little more than a quarter mile to the next bridge, look north along Thorne's Creek for Purple Martins, which now nest in houses provided by a homeowner here.
Birding the southern section of the lake:
Natco Park, a 260-acre Green Acres site managed by Hazlet Township, consists of mature swampy woods excellent in spring for migrants. From the Lakeside Manor restaurant parking lot, walk down the Orange Trail near the lake and into the woods. Philadelphia Vireo has been seen here in late May. The mature oaks along this trail can have Bay-breasted, Tennessee, and Cape May Warblers. A knowledge of bird song will be helpful here as the vegetation is thick. The trail turns left and follows the shoreline, eventually coming to a small cove (1 on map) where Spotted Sandpipers are seen.
At the south end of the cove, the trail (now the Red Trail) turns southeasterly into the woods. A small footbridge crosses over a little ripple called Thorne's Creek. Here the understory is again very thick. In this area in spring I've seen such sought-after migrants as Yellow-throated Vireo; Louisiana Waterthrush; and Worm-Eating, Prothonotary, Hooded, and Kentucky Warblers.
Continue south along the Red Trail. As you approach another footbridge, the Blue Trail comes in from the right. Follow it a short way to an area with standing water in spring (2). Check this spot for Rusty Blackbird and Northern Waterthrush.
Back on the main Red Trail, continue south. The trail gains elevation, leading into an area of pitch pine habitat (3). Pine Warbler nests and Whip-poor-will has been found here.
Retrace your steps back along the trail to the cove at the lake. Facing the cove, take the part of the Red Trail that leads left [west] away from the lake. The mature deciduous woods along the trail have nesting Wood Thrush, Ovenbird, and Red-eyed Vireo. This trail eventually comes to a T intersection with the Yellow Trail. Turn left onto the Yellow Trail, which will gain elevation until it arrives at another T intersection. Turn right on the unmarked trail and walk slowly to a small opening in the forest. In spring the vernal pond here (4) holds the occasional Solitary Sandpiper. Roosting above the pond in spring I've seen Broad-winged and Red-shouldered Hawks. Continuing along this trail will lead through several wet areas with second-growth woodland. Prairie, Mourning, and Wilson's Warblers have been seen here, and Brown Thrashers nest in this area.
Return to the last T, and turn left to retrace your route along the Yellow Trail. Pass the intersection with the Red Trail and continue straight ahead on the Yellow Trail to reach the parking lot.
Raptors are very much in evidence in the Natco Lake area in spring as northbound hawks bump up against the bayshore. On west winds, hawk flights can be seen over the park right from the parking lot. These flights consist mostly of buteos, with vultures, accipiters, and the occasional Bald Eagle mixed in. Mississippi Kite and Common Raven were seen over the park in Spring 2012.
Additional breeding birds in the park include Scarlet Tanager, Great-crested Flycatcher, Ruby-throated Hummingbird, Cooper's Hawk, and Great Horned and Screech Owls. Northern Saw-whet Owl has occurred in winter. Mammals in the park include Whitetail Deer, Opossum, Raccoon, Striped Skunk, flying squirrel and both Red and Gray Fox. With its mix of deciduous swamp and upland pine oak forest, Natco is also very botanically diverse.
Natco's mix of habitat, along with its location on the bayshore, makes it a great place to discover birds.
For more information on the park, including a more complete trail map, write to the Hazlet Environmental Commission at 317 Middle Road, Hazlet, NJ 07730.

If there’s a stack of old newspapers gathering dust under the bed or out in the shed, Australian libraries want to know about it.
The search is on for these valuable pieces of our social history, as part of the Australian Newspaper Plan (www.nla.gov.au/anplan), a nation-wide initiative of state and territory libraries designed to find, collect and preserve access to historic newspapers.
National spokeswoman for the ANPlan, Cathy Pilgrim, of the National Library of Australia, said newspapers did not just report the news. They told stories of their times, through advertisements, photographs and even their design – stories we want to save for all Australians.
“The aim is to find the thousands of missing pieces in the jigsaw of our history,” she said.
“Old newspapers are an important part of our social, political and cultural history and they offer valuable insights into a society changed forever.
Some of Australia’s most wanted newspapers include:
* Cairns Advocate (1897-1882);
* Croydon Miner (1887-1888)
* Mundic Miner and Etheridge Gazette (1889-1917);
* Pilbarra Goldfields News (1901);
* Mercury and South Australian sporting chronicle (1849-1851);
* Renmark Pioneer (1893-1895).
“Often a chance conversation uncovers these wanted papers which may have been lying hidden in someone’s garage, in an elderly person’s collection of keepsakes, or even in the vaults of a local historical society or archive,” Ms Pilgrim said.
Once the wanted newspapers have been tracked down, they will be carefully saved to ensure their preservation for future generations of Australians. Access will be made freely available through the National Library of Australia and state and territory libraries.
For a full list of the wanted newspapers from all states of Australia, go to www.nla.gov.au/anplan
For information on the Australian Newspaper Plan:
Contact Cathy Pilgrim on 02 6262 1514; firstname.lastname@example.org
For information on ACT newspapers:
Contact Julie Whiting on 02 6262 1157; email@example.com

College life involves excitement, along with new challenges, risks, and responsibilities. You are meeting new people, learning new things, and making your own decisions. It can sometimes be stressful. You have to deal with pressures related to food, drink, appearance, drugs, and sexual activity.
There are steps you can take to stay healthy and safe while you're in college, such as
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References and abstracts from MEDLINE/PubMed (National Library of Medicine)

- online helpsearch for term
1. An electronic documentation file formatted according to the requirements of the destination operating system. Help files generally contain short instructions about how to perform certain features. They generally have fewer graphics than printed or electronic books of the same material. Help files reformat as needed to the screen window dimensions, and make heavy use of hypertext linking, pop-up boxes, and so forth. Help files are context-sensitive, which means that you can jump to a specific topic within the help file directly from the applications dialog and menu interface, etc.

Did you ever stop to consider just how a volcano works? Of course it is only theory for no one has as yet dissected a volcano while it was active to observe and tabulate the reactions of its inner self. Rainier is a volcanic cone and no doubt it came into being in this manner.
First at a depth below the surface of the earth in some long, forgotten time the magma or molten rock presed toward the surface possibly throuhg some fracture in the outer crust. With these rising lavas there was also much gas that advanced ahead of the lava and thus both the gas and the lava pressed toward the surface gradually accumulating force and power under the pressure as its advance was hindered by the solid material above. And then finally this flow of motlen rock and gases achieved enogh power to burst through the surface. First, possibly, there was an explosive action as the gases burst upward and this was followed by more quiet flows of the lavas that welled out over the surface and inundated, in succeeding eruptions and lava flows, over 100 square miles of surrounding country which is the area of "The Mountain's" great base.
And in that manner eruptions followed one another when the pressure within the throat of this fire mountain achieved enough power to burst through the "plug" of hardened lavas which solidified after each flow. Rainier hasn't been active for several thousands of years and there is apparently little chance of its becoming active again but it stands today - a magnificent volcanic shaft, its flanks glistening with the greatest glacial system in continentaly United States, - a monument to nature's power in its wildest moods.
|<<< Previous||> Cover <|

LESSON PLANS AND TIMES MATERIALS FOR TEACHING:
The Academy Awards
The Film Industry
Film in Language Arts
Film in Social Studies/History
Film in Fine Arts
Technology in Film
Lessons on these pages are for grades 6-12, written in consultation with Bank Street College of Education. Each one is paired with a Times article.
Learning Network Features
Selected Times Articles on Film Adaptations
Resources on the Web
LESSONS ON THE ACADEMY AWARDS:
The Envelope, Please
Investigating the Cultural Context of Oscar-Winning Films in the Past and Present
And the Oscar Goes to...
Examining and Creating Criteria for Oscar-Worthy Films
And the Winner Is...
Exploring the Role of the Academy Awards and Film in American Society
LESSONS ON THE FILM INDUSTRY:
Creating Film Festivals that Inform and Entertain Audiences
The Sundance Kids
Exploring What Makes the Independent Film Industry So Attractive to So Many
The Raid on Raters
Exploring the Current Movie Rating System
Minding the Media
Examining Ethical Questions About Media Rating Systems
The Reel World
Exploring the Appropriateness of Movies for Children
Considering the Costs of Making Movies
Fit to Be Tied (In)
Examining How Companies Target the Right Audiences
Old Hobbits Are Hard to Break
Learning About the Marketing of Motion Pictures on the Web
LESSONS ON AND WITH FILMMAKING:
Quiet on the Set!
Exploring Character and Conflict Development by Creating Short Films
Drawing Upon Successful Elements of the "Harry Potter" Series to Develop Short Films
Producing a Documentary Film Spotlighting the Everyday Sights and Sounds of a School
Creating Documentaries About Students' Everyday Lives
Through the Eyes of a Child
Creating Documentaries from the Perspectives of Adolescents
Creating Documentaries About Important Social Issues
Creating a Documentary about Rituals Related to Books
Creating Biographical Films for Current Political Candidates' Campaigns
More Power to You
Creating Documentaries About Energy Sources
Exploring the Pacific Rim by Writing Documentary Film Treatments
LESSONS USING FILM IN LANGUAGE ARTS:
Writing Movie Reviews
Screening the Silver Screen
Writing New York Times Movie Reviews
Exploring Plot Similarities in Fiction and Nonfiction Stories
Constructing Movie Sets Through Descriptive Writing
The Battle of Good and Evil on the Big Screen
A Media Studies Lesson Plan
If I Could Talk Like the Animals. . .
Teaching Personification and Narrative Writing in the Language Arts Classroom
The Sorcerers Shown
Comparing Similar Character Genres in Literature and Film
Talk About the Passion
Creating an Educational Guide to Encourage Critical Thinking about the Film "The Passion of Christ"
Creating Vocabulary-Rich Advertisements to Recognize Glover's Contribution to "Happy Feet"
Analyzing Similarities and Differences Among the Live, Film and Written Versions of Tony Award Winning Productions
LESSONS USING FILM IN SOCIAL STUDIES/HISTORY:
Tell Me Something Good
Analyzing Moviegoers' Preferences in an Economic Recession
Golden Globe as Gauge
Exploring How Hollywood Reflects the American Political and Cultural Climate
Is All Cinema Verité?
Exploring the Relationship Between Movies and Culture
Los Artistas Unidos
Exploring Questions of Diversity in the Casting of Actors for Popular Television Shows and Movies
Exploring Legislation About Violence in the Media
Making Sense of Censorship
Clarifying Rating Systems for Entertainment
Let There Be Peace
Exploring the Accomplishments of Nobel Peace Prize Recipients
A Woman's Worth
Examining the Changing Roles of Women in Cultures Around the World
LESSONS USING FILM IN FINE ARTS:
Setting the Stage from the Page
Creating Original Artwork that Transforms Text to the Big Screen
The Art of Violence
Creating Original Works of Art That Explore the Depiction of Violence
Lyrics of Hazzard
Updating Classic Music for a Movie Soundtrack
State of the Art
Identifying the Merits of a Favorite Work of Art
LESSONS ON TECHNOLOGY IN FILM:
Exploring Plausible Inventions for Make-Believe Movies
The New Fant-"Asia"
Contrasting Animated and Live-Action Filmmaking
Actors and Actresses
Screen Actors Guild
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
Sundance Film Festival
Tribeca Film Festival
LEARNING NETWORK FEATURES:
Student Crossword: Oscar-Winning Films
News Snapshot: Best of the Bunch
News Snapshot: Hopeful Hollywood
News Snapshot: Pop + Art = Oscar?
News Snapshot: Holy Box Office, Batman!
News Snapshot: And the Nominees Are …
Times Movies Section
Times Critics' Picks
Times Reviews archive
The Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made
Blog: The Carpetbagger
Interactive Graphic: The Ebb and Flow of Movies: Box Office Receipts 1986-2008
SELECTED TIMES ARTICLES ON FILM ADAPTATIONS:
All Right, You Try: Adaptation Isn't Easy
Article by screenwriter Stephen Schiff on the challenges of adapting source material for film, including Susan Orlean's "The Orchid Thief," which became the Charlie Kaufman film "Adaptation."
Can a Film Do Justice to Literature?
Article about arguments over whether or not ''good literature is too substantial to fit through the lens of a camera.''
The Best Novelists, The Worst Movie Adaptations
Article about how great novels don't necessarily translate into great films.
Any Novel Can Be Shaped Into a Movie
Article on how some film adaptations, such as the one of "The English Patient," are as artistic as the novels they are based on.
Cuddling Up to Quasimodo and Friends
Article on film adaptations that are not true to their source material.
Is It Time To Trust Hollywood?
1990 essay by Molly Haskell that takes a broad look at Hollywood's history of book-to-movie adaptations.
Seen the Movie? Read the Book!
1987 essay by John Updike about adapting literature for film.
Adapting and Revising Twain's 'Huck Finn'
1986 essay by book critic Michiko Kakutani on the difficulties of adapting Twain.
2008 essay by Sophie Gee about adaptations of "Beowulf" and "Paradise Lost."
Romancing the Book…Once Again
1992 article about Hollywood's interest in literary classics.
RESOURCES ON THE WEB:
Scenarios USA holds an annual topical writing contest to pair student screenwriters in underserved communities with Hollywood filmmakers, who turn the students' stories into short films. The Scenarios USA Web site includes materials for teachers.
Teacher's Guide to Making Student Movies
From Scholastic Teaching Resources, designed for grades 3-12.
Mini Movie Makers
Resource for student filmmakers, developed by three young brothers.
MORE RESOURCES FOR TEACHING WITH THE TIMES:
Learning Network classroom resources on a wide range of topics.

|HIV/AIDS Networking Guide - A comprehensive resource for individuals and organisations who wish to build, strengthen or sustain a network (International Council of AIDS Service Organisations, 1997, 48 p.)|
|Chapter 1 - Networking for a More Effective Response To HIV and AIDS|
Most networks have some or all of the following characteristics. They are:
a group of organizations and/or individuals who come together to pursue joint goals or common interests;
venues for social action through exchange and mutual learning;
sustained through some form of communication;
committed to a jointly developed structure and shared responsibility; and
they are based on member-ownership and commitment to shared objectives and means of action.

Falcon researcher Dr Donna Falconer (photographed by a
motion-activated camera) uses a walking pole to protect
herself from attacking falcons, at Ferintosh Station, near
Mt Cook. Photo supplied.
There is no room for complacency over the future of the
endangered New Zealand falcon, researcher and falcon advocate
Dr Donna Falconer says.
Dr Falconer, who recently gained a University of Otago PhD in
geology, and has had her distinctive name since birth,
swiftly found herself inspired by a series of close
encounters with New Zealand falcons after moving to Twizel
six years ago.
Her subsequent research and close-up photography involving
falcons will feature in a talk she will give at the Orokonui
Ecosanctuary at 1pm tomorrow.
Dr Falconer said she was seriously considering going back to
Otago University to study for another PhD, on these birds.
It was a good time to be raising awareness about the karearea
or New Zealand falcon, as the latest season's fledglings were
''starting to make themselves known''.
Chicks from the Eastern falcon subtype, in the mid/southern
South Island, started fledging from early December until the
middle of this month and were easy to tell from their parents
because they had white/grey feet and soft fleshy body parts,
whereas adults were all yellow.
Two of the biggest threats inexperienced falcons faced were
being electrocuted by power lines or hit by cars when eating
Falcons were ''a bit of a double-edged sword'' where
ecosanctuaries were concerned.
''As majestic as they are, it's only natural they'd put all
those incredible hunting skills to good use given the
veritable smorgasbord of fine dining opportunities at their
wing tips in such places.''
Orokonui Ecosanctuary general manager Chris Baillie said two
falcons and a hawk overflew the ecosanctuary from time to
She was not aware of having lost any birds or other animals
through falcon predation, and birds and lizards had places to
hide if needed.
''Falcons are part of the ecosystem- they deserve
conservation as much as any other native species.''

From Ohio History Central
Acanthodians were among the earliest fishes with jaws and are found in Silurian through Permian rocks. Their fragmentary remains are found in Devonian, Mississippian, and Pennsylvanian rocks in Ohio. These remains consist of shiny, rhomboid-shaped scales and fin spines. Fin spines of a comparatively large acanthodian, Machaeracanthus, are found in the Columbus Limestone.

Lithuanian is a Baltic language related to Latvian and Old Prussian with about 3.2 million speakers in Lithuania. There are also Lithuanian speakers in Poland, the USA, Brazil, Argentina, Canada, the UK and Uruguay.
Lithuanian first appeared in print in the form of a catechism in 1547. The first Lithuanian dictionary was printed during the 17th century. Between 1864 and 1904 the printing and teaching of Lithuanian was banned - Russian, Polish, Belarusian or Latin had to be used instead. After this ban was lifted in 1904, there was a resurgence of Lithuanian literature.
From 1918 to 1940 Lithuania was independent and over 7,000 books in Lithuanian were published. During the Soviet period (1940-1991), literature in Lithuania tended to follow the socialist realist model, while Lithuanian ex-pats wrote mainly about the culture and traditions of Lithuania. Since 1991, when Lithuania once more gained its independence, a large number of publications in Lithuanian has appeared, including newspapers, magazines and scientific and technical works.
Lithuanian is the state language of Lithuania and one of the official languages of the European Union (EU). It is also recognised as a minority language in Poland.
Visi žmonės gimsta laisvi ir lygūs savo orumu ir teisėmis. Jiems suteiktas protas ir sąžinė ir jie turi elgtis vienas kito atžvilgiu kaip broliai.
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They
are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another
in a spirit of brotherhood.
(Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights)
Online Lithuanian phrases
Online Lithuanian news
Online Lithuanian radio
Hosted by Kualo

It started as a simple excavation project at a reservoir near Snowmass Village. It ended up as one of the largest fossil excavations ever, and the project will soon be featured in National Geographic and as a one-hour NOVA program on Rocky Mountain PBS. A book is also being written about the Snowmastodon Project™
The NOVA program is called “Ice Age Death Trap” and it premiers at 8 p.m MST, Wednesday, Feb. 1 on Rocky Mountain PBS. The television special follows scientists as they raced against a deadline to uncover the unique site packed with well-preserved bones of mammoths, mastodons, and other giant extinct beasts.
Acrylic painting of Ziegler Reservoir landscape by Jan Vriesen, depicts about 120,000 years ago, when the area was dominated by mastodon, giant ground sloths, and bison. Photo courtesy ©Denver Museum of Nature & Science.
The Denver Museum of Nature & Science sent crews to the site, where they uncovered 5,000 bones of 41 kinds of Ice Age animals. In addition to the mammoths and mastodons, there were ground sloths, camels, deer, horses, and giant bison.
Overview of Ice Age dig site near Snowmass Village (lower left). Photo courtesy ©Denver Museum of Nature & Science.
The February issue of National Geographic magazine will feature a short article and photo of the project. The new book, Digging Snowmastodon: Discovering an Ice Age World in the Colorado Rockies, goes on sale at the museum March 20.
A Tusk Force was also formed by the Town of Snowmass Village and they created a non-profit entity called Discover Snowmass to organize, and figure out how to capitalize on the Snowmass Ice Age find. The Snowmass Ice Age Discovery Center is on the Snowmass Village Mall. It’s free and open every day in the winter from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Snowy, the mascot, is frequently seen around the Snowmass Village Mall. Photo courtesy Snowmass Tourism.
“The scientists aren’t the only ones that are excited about this extraordinary find,” said Patsy Popejoy with Snowmass Tourism. “The entire community has ‘mammoth’ fever, from a local restaurant changing their name to Little Mammoth Cafe serving up Mastodon Stew, our retailers selling Ice Age T-shirts, mugs, and stuffed animal mammoths and mastodons, to the Town Council approving Widespread Panic’s song ‘Woolly Mammoth’ as the official town song. The discovery has created quite a buzz in the community and with our visitors.”
Dr. Kirk Johnson, Vice President of Research & Collections and Chief Curator of the Denver Museum of Nature and Science and a lead scientist on the dig, will be back in Snowmass on March 22nd to give an Aspen Historical Society-sponsored talk about the discovery.
The Snowmass Ice Age Discovery Center is on the Snowmass Village Mall. Photo courtesy Snowmass Tourism.

|Search Results (7 videos found)|
|NASADestinationTomorrow - DT12 - Flight Pioneers
NASA Destination Tomorrow Segment exploring the background of the first attempted flights. The segment also looks back on the pioneers who built the first flying machine.
Keywords: NASA Destination Tomorrow; First Flight; Wright Brothers; Glider; Flight Pioneers; Flying Machine; Aviation; Aerodynamic Principles; Bird Flight; Feathers; Flapping Wings; Heavier Than Air Machine; Hot Air Balloon; Lift; Drag; Whirling Arm; Wing Designs;
Popularity (downloads): 2838
|Wetlands Regained, segment 06 of 8
Wetland acreage was in danger of disappearing, and restoration was urgent
Popularity (downloads): 386
|Sham battle at the Pan-American Exposition
Large arches and columns are seen surrounding a flat field. In the foreground of the field, some American Indians on horseback ride toward the camera. The Indians are wearing feathers,...
Keywords: Pan-American Exposition--(1901 :--Buffalo; N; Y; )United States; --Army; --Infantry--Drill and tactics--Drama; Battles--New York (State)--Buffalo--Drama; Indians of North America--Wars--Drama; Exhibitions--United States; Exhibition buildings--New York (State)--Buffalo; Buffalo (NY)Actuality--Short;
Popularity (downloads): 610
|NASADestinationTomorrow - Episode 12
NASA Destination Tomorrow Video containing four segments as described below. NASA Destination Tomorrow Segment exploring the transition of aircraft design through the years. The segment describes what aircraft may...
Keywords: NASA Destination Tomorrow; Aircraft Revolution; Jet Engine; Propeller; Innovation; Efficient; Vehicle Systems Program; Subsonic Transports; Supersonic Aircraft; Personal Air Vehicles; Blended Wing Body; BWB; Emissions; Noise Reduction; Environmentally Friendly; Air Pressure Waves; Sound Barrier; Shock Wave; Sonic Boom; First Flight; Wright Brothers; Controlled Flight; Aircraft Design; Aeronautical Annual; Bicycle; Glider Flight; Scientists; Engineers; Engine; Flight Pioneers; Flying Machine; Aviation; Aerodynamic Principles; Bird Flight; Feathers; Flapping Wings; Heavier Than Air Machine; Hot Air Balloon; Lift; Drag; Whirling Arm; Wing Designs; NASA; NACA; Aeronautical Development; Aviation Organization; President Woodrow Wilson; Pioneer Flight Achievments; Lab; Variable Density Tunnel; High Altitude Flying; Air Pressure; Wind Tunnel; Aerodynamics; Jet Powered Aircraft;
Popularity (downloads): 2381
|NASASciFiles - The Case of the Challenging Flight
NASA Sci Files video containing the following twelve segments. NASA Sci Files segment describing how engineers negotiate the natural factors that affect airplane flight. NASA Sci Files segment describing how...
Keywords: Bob Star; Electronic Classroom; Dryden Flight Research Center; Weight; Center Of Gravity; Wing; Tail; Pitch; Yaw; F 104 Starfighter; Lift; X29; Burt Rutan; Boomerang; Proteus; Voyager; Imagination; Wing Span; Thrust; Dr. Textbook; Birds; Icarus; DaVinci;
Popularity (downloads): 2795
|NASA Connect - Problem Solving - The Wright Math
NASA Connect Video containing five segments as described below. NASA Connect segment featuring the website of the U.S. Centennial Flight Commission. The website consists of activities for students and teachers...
Keywords: NASA Connect; Centennial of Flight; Wright Brothers; Congress; United States; Web Activity; Astronautics; Aeronautics; Flight Simulator; Axis; First Flying Machine; Glider; Kitty Hawk; Engineering Method; Pitch; Roll; Yaw; Wind Tunnel; Elevator Control; Wing Warp; Rudder; Propellor; Wing; Lift; Drag; Student Activity; Kite; Sail Area; Base; Height; Trapezoidal; Aspect Ratio; Span; First Flight; Wilbur Wright; Orville Wright; Flying Machine; Inventor; Process of Invention; Aircraft Design; Computer Simulation; Biology; Force; Pressure; Relationship; Design Process; Metamorphosis; Morphing; Technology; Control Devices; Smart Matierals; Adaptive Structure; Aerodynamics; Air Flow; Micro-Flow Control; Biomimetics; Nature; Fish Fins;
Popularity (downloads): 2241
|NASASciFiles - The Case of The Zany Animal Antics
NASA Sci Files video containing four segments as described below. In the first segment of the Case of the Zany Animal Antics, the tree house detectives learn about the animal...
Keywords: NASA SciFiles; The Zany Animal Antics; Animal Kingdom; Kingdom; Phylum; Class; Order;Family; Genus; Species; Classification; Dichotomous Key; Bioluminescent; Endoskeleton; Ectotherms; Fish; Amphibians; Metamorphos; Reptiles; Birds; Mammals; Food Chain; Consumers; Herbivores; Carnivores; Food Web; Migration; Migration Patterns; DNA; Mitosis; Meiosis; Zygote; Reproduction; Student Activity; Bats; Population; Random Sample; Endangered Species; Bald Eagle; Levels of Endangerment;
Popularity (downloads): 1657

"I was born here but I'm not an American" understanding the U.S. history curriculum through the eyes of Latino students /
The purpose of this investigation was to explore Latino students’ perceptions of
the US History curriculum at one high school in the Eastern United States. The ultimate
objective was to understand if the US History classes are serving the perceived needs of
Latino students. Latinos are 40% of our nation’s minorities, are the youngest population
group, and are the fastest growing.
The social studies is the ideal curriculum area for challenging the dominant
worldview and teaching about the diversity present in the classroom, the nation, and the
world; therefore, learning more about socio-culturally inclusive social studies curriculum
and pedagogy is an important consideration. This project is significant because it
intersects with topics essential to the future of our nation: schools, the social studies
curriculum, culturally and linguistically diverse (CLD) students, and students’
perspectives. Furthermore, the focus of this research overlaps with the reality of today’s
educational system: state content standards and high stakes testing. All of these aspects
will be addressed.
This study was influenced by Latino Critical Theory. LatCrit is an outgrowth of
Critical Race Theory (hereafter known as CRT). CRT interrogates how research is
traditionally done by forefronting race to demonstrate the depth of inequality that exists
across society. LatCrit builds on the five themes of CRT while adding perspectives
unique to Latino experiences in the United States such as language acquisition, cultural
background, gender, ethnicity, immigration status, and colonial experience.
Data were collected for six months at Crawford High School (name changed).
The data sources included observation notes, interview transcripts from students,
teachers, administrators, and a State Board of Education member, the researcher’s
journal, and document analysis of the State Social Studies Standards and a practice
version of the State Graduation Test.
Data were analyzed utilizing the lens of la frontera. La frontera underscores the
displacement and transitionality of identities, pertinent to the lives of the studentparticipants.
In addition, these theories, which manifest themselves as metaphorical
tropes, compliment LatCrit, the lens through which I view my research.
The students made public what is already known: that the educational system
must become more culturally inclusive of and responsive to CLD students’ needs.
However, this study revealed data patterns with student participants that have not been
captured within one study. A major finding of this study was that the US History
curriculum is or is not meeting student participants’ needs in different ways, based upon
pertinent characteristics of the students. Latino students’ responses were informed by the
following critical factors: English speaking ability, recency of arrival in the United States,
and level of integration into the power structures of the state where the research was
completed. The level of integration was further influenced by students’ documentation
status (their legal status in the US), parents’ English speaking ability, and the English
speaking ability of members in a student’s residence and immediate neighborhood.
Students’ responses fell distinctly into three groups based upon these characteristics.
The students in Group One stressed the basic need to learn English. Maslow
described human motivation with Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs. Perhaps this is what
students in Group One were telling me—their most basic needs had to be met before they
would be ready to “grow” in American schools. Group Two student-participants wanted
their culture to be present so that other students—particularly White students—would
learn about them. Group Three students conformed to previous studies conducted with
White students—they wanted to learn in more interactive ways, working with groups, and
being stimulated with flashy videos.
Students at Crawford did not have an adequate framework around which to make
sense of race, racism, and racial tensions. The presence of how race was talked about, and
the absence of how race was not talked about, led to negative stereotypes against Latinos
based upon ethnicity, immigration status, and native language. Furthermore, one teacher
demonstrated a closed paradigm of ethnicity and skin color that silenced one of his
students. The student-participants in all Groups wanted to talk about race. They wanted to
talk about their “positive invisibility” at Crawford—that is, the absence of affirmative
constructions around their ethnicity, country of origin, and language. The findings
suggest that there is a need for more studies with Latino students that focus on the aspects
of Latino Critical Theory.
This dissertation is dedicated to the students, my wonderful family,
and my friends all over the world.
School:The Ohio State University
School Location:USA - Ohio
Source Type:Master's Thesis
Keywords:hispanic american high school students multicultural education critical theory discrimination in united states
Date of Publication:

PHP, while originally designed and built to run on Unix, has had the ability since version 3 to run on Windows. That includes 9x, ME, NT, and 2000. In this article I'm going to go through the process of installing PHP on Windows and explain what you should look out for.
On Windows, as on Unix, you have two options for installing PHP: as a CGI or as an ISAPI module. The obvious benefit of the latter is speed. The downside is that this is still somewhat new and may not be as stable. But, before you do anything, you have to do some prep work, which is pretty simple. Once you've downloaded and unzipped the Windows binary version of PHP, you have to copy
php4isapi.dll from the sapi/ directory to WINNT/system or WINDOWS/system directories. You'll also probably want to move
php.ini-dist from your installation directory to the
WINDOWS/ directory and rename it to
php.ini, if you plan on changing any of the precompiled defaults. Now you're ready to go, regardless of whether you use PHP as a CGI or ISAPI module.
For NT/2000, you'll need to tell IIS how to recognize PHP. Thanks to the wonders of GUI, this can easily be accomplished with a few mouse clicks. First, fire up the Microsoft Management Console or Internet Service Manager, depending on whether you're using NT or 2000. Click on the Properties button of the web node you'll be working with. In this example we'll use Default Web Server. Click the ISAPI Filters tab and then click Add. Use
php as the name and in the path put the location of
php4isapi.dll, which should be
C:\WINNT\system\ in this example.
Configuring IIS to recognize PHP.
Under the Home Directory tab, click the Configuration button, then click Add for Application Mappings. Use the same location of
php4isapi.dll as you did with ISAP Filters and use
.php as the extension. Here comes the caveat!! As a test, I tried using as my path the temporary location of
php4isapi.dll, which was in the install directory on my desktop. Windows 2000 popped up a wonderfully annoying little box telling me I'm stupid and I should go dunk my head in the sand. OK, so it wasn't quite that wordy, but that's how I took it. Apparently Windows 2000 and IIS require App Mappings to be under the WINDOWS dir at least. So keep that in mind if you don't like sand up your nose.
Now, click OK on the Properties dialog. The next thing to do is start and stop IIS. This isn't the same as pushing the stop and start buttons on the Management Console. You should go to a command (or cmd, as it were) window and type
net stop issadmin. Wait for it to tell you what it's doing, as if you were nosy enough to care, and then type
net start w3svc. Why they didn't make it
net start iisadmin is beyond me. But I'm a Unix guy, and logic seems to be my downfall here. But I digress...
So now you have PHP installed as an ISAPI module on Windows! Aren't you happy? Probably not, because you probably don't believe me. Well, if you need proof just go to
C:\inetpub\wwwroot\ and put a file called
test.php in there. Inside that file put the following code:
<?php phpinfo(); ?>
Then pull up
test.php in your browser. If you see the PHP Info page, it worked! Now this probably goes without saying, so I'll say it. You have to pull up
test.php as a web page in the browser using
http://. If you give the path for the file using
file://, then you'll get a raw output of the code, which is no fun.
The PHP Info page indicates success.
On Windows 9x/ME, you're somewhat restricted to PWS (Personal Web Server). Of course there are alternatives such as OmniHTTPd, but we don't have all day here! Anyway, this is far simpler. It's mainly just a matter of a registry entry.
After you've moved
php4ts.dll to the appropriate directories, you should open up your favorite registry editor. At this point I note the obligatory warnings about fooling around with the registry, blah, blah, blah... In
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Services\w3svc\parameters\Script Map, you'll want to add an entry with the name of
.php and a value of
Next, go start up the PWS Manager. For each of the directories that you want to make PHP aware, you have to right-click on that directory and check the executable box.
Now you're ready. Perform the same test (
test.php) as I described above, and have fun making all those ASP cronies jealous at the the guru-like glow that surrounds you!
Darrell Brogdon is a web developer for SourceForge at VA Linux Systems and has been using PHP since 1996.
Read more PHP Admin Basics columns.
Discuss this article in the O'Reilly Network PHP Forum.
Return to the PHP DevCenter.
Copyright © 2009 O'Reilly Media, Inc.

As an OB/GYN physician, I know intimately the dangers of preterm labor. I’ve held in my arms the mother who lost her preemie daughter after her uterus inexplicably began contracting and spewed out her 24 week old baby before she was fully cooked. I’ve watched the preemies in the nursery get stuck with tubes in every orifice while incubators try to mimic the womb and ventilators push air into their undeveloped lungs. I’ve seen the children, years later, get wheeled into my exam room after enduring countless surgeries to deal with the disabilities prematurity can cause. And I’ve attended the pregnant women we imprison in the hospital for weeks on end as we try to prevent this deadly pregnancy complication.
We don’t know what causes preterm labor. If we did, we might be able to prevent it. It’s still one of the great mysteries of obstetrics. While technological advances like gene therapy and transplant surgery revolutionize health care, we still don’t understand the most basic things about how pregnancy works. In fact, at the University of Chicago, there’s an empty plaque, awaiting the name of the person who discovers what causes labor, so we can learn to prevent preterm birth.
So far, we’re still clueless.
But we’ve made progress in the past decade. When a New England Journal of Medicine article suggested that the hormone 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-P) would reduce the risk of preterm birth, OB/GYNs listened. However, this old drug, which used to be used to treat preterm birth, had fallen out of favor, and no manufacturers made it anymore.
So practitioners got resourceful and started getting 17-P from compounding pharmacies, where it could be manufactured from scratch for about $20 per dose.
Because the quality of compounding pharmacies vary, and because what drug a woman gets during pregnancy matters, docs were happy when the FDA approved a new drug Makena which would standardize 17-P and make it readily available at hospitals and pharmacies.
The FDA reviewed data of a study that showed that, among women with a prior preterm birth, women given Makena in a subsequent pregnancy had a preterm birth rate of 37%, compared to 55% in the control group. Good news, eh?
You’d think. So KV Pharmaceutical, who won seven years worth of exclusive rights on this drug that has been around since the 1950s, then started firing off letters to compounding pharmacies, announcing that they could no longer make 17-P available to the public without facing possible legal action.
Which means that women at high risk of preterm birth must now buy Makena, instead of relying upon their friendly neighborhood compounding pharmacist to
make it up.
So how much does the new (old) drug Makena cost?
$1500 per dose.
Yes, you heard me right. This $20 drug now costs $1500 per dose. That’s about $30,000 per at-risk pregnancy. And insurances get to decide individually whether or not they will cover it -- but even if they do, that’ll mean big co-pays and deductibles.
Can I just say it like it is? BULLSHIT. F you, Big Pharma.
Are you telling me that women who are at risk of preterm birth (lower socio-economic women are at the highest risk) will have to pony up 30 grand if they want
to prevent losing a pregnancy or raising a disabled child because insurance won’t cover it? Are you telling me our health care industry is so broken that, instead of making this ancient drug available at an affordable price and preventing preterm births, they’d prefer to pay millions to care for that preemie in the NICU or treat that disabled child?
Why? Why? Why?
Why is this legal? According to the Washington Post, “FDA officials said that they had no idea how much the company planned to charge for the drug and were surprised by the cost but that the agency has no power over pricing.”
How did our health care industry become so broken that this kind of thing can happen? Where is the heart in medicine these days? When did patient care start taking a backseat to the bottom line?
No wonder patients and health care providers alike feel so frustrated, demoralized, and disempowered.
Something’s gotta change.
According to the same FDA official, “If requested, the agency could approve a lower-priced generic version of the drug for another use that doctors could prescribe 'off label.'” The official also said that the agency would not prevent compounding pharmacies from continuing to provide 17-P unless patient safety is thought to be at risk. “We have our hands full pursuing our enforcement priorities,” the official said to the Washington Post. “And it’s not illegal for a physician to write a prescription for a compounded drug or for a patient to take a compounded drug. We certainly are concerned about access of patients to medication.”
So if you or anyone you know had a previous preterm baby, tell them to ask their doctor about prescribing 17-P. If the doctor thinks they are a good candidate for 17-P, suggest getting it from a compounding pharmacy, rather than supporting a Big Pharma company that’s trying to screw us all.
I still have my issues with Big Pharma, but I do understand that pharmaceutical industries pay big bucks to support research programs that help us all. I do understand that it’s a business and that they need to make their money in the first seven years, while their drug is still under patent. I get that their business model supports innovation and the creation of drugs that move us forward, and that without them, we might lag in our pharmaceutical options.
But this drug has been around forever. And it’s a natural hormone. I mean seriously people! Get a heart. These are pregnant women we’re talking about. These are preemie babies we’re trying to save. This is an old, natural hormone that you didn’t just invent, KV. Do something right for a change. Put the health of people above the bottom line. Or at least back off the compounding pharmacies and let people seek this potentially life-saving hormone elsewhere. It’s the right thing to do.
What do you think of this? Is your blood boiling like mine is? How did this happen? When did we lose the heart of medicine?
Speaking up on behalf of mothers and babies everywhere,
PS: Woah, check out this Washington Post article from this morning -- "FDA to allow cheaper preterm baby drug". Looks like the FDA is stepping in -- but still, how do you feel about this whole controversy? I'm glad the FDA is stepping up to the plate and laying off of compounding pharmacies, but still outraged that KV even tried something like this in our health care system.. On that note, I’m hard at work on a manifesto about this very topic (not so much Big Pharma, but reclaiming the heart of healing). So stay tuned…
Lissa Rankin, MD: Founder of OwningPink.com, Pink Medicine Woman coach, motivational speaker, and author of What’s Up Down There? Questions You’d Only Ask Your Gynecologist If She Was Your Best Friend and Encaustic Art: The Complete Guide To Creating Fine Art With Wax.
When you comment on an Owning Pink blog post, we invite you to be authentic and loving, to say what you feel, to hold sacred space so others feel heard, and to refrain from using hurtful or offensive language. Differing opinions are welcomed, but if you cannot express yourself in a respectful, caring manner, your comments will be deleted by the Owning Pink staff.

Helping the Overweight Child
Helping your child with social and emotional concerns
It doesn't take long for children to figure out that our culture and their peers idealize thinness. Children who are overweight are especially at risk of being teased and feeling alone. This can cause low self-esteem and Reference depression Opens New Window.
For information about helping a child who is being teased, see the topic Reference Bullying.
To help your child have greater health, confidence, and self-esteem, you can:
- Avoid talking in terms of your child's weight. How you talk about your child's body has a big impact on your child's self-image. Instead, talk in terms of your child's health, activity level, and other healthy lifestyle choices.
- Be a good role model by having a healthy attitude about food and activity. Even if you struggle with how you feel about your own body, avoid talk in front of your child about "being fat" and "needing to diet." Instead, talk about and make the same healthy lifestyle choices you'd like for your child.
- Encourage activities, such as sports and theater. Physical activity helps build physical and emotional confidence. Try different types of sports and activities until your child finds one that he or she likes. Theater can help a child project strength and confidence, even if he or she doesn't feel it at first.
- Encourage social involvement in community, church, and school activities, which build social skills and confidence.
- Help your child eat well by providing healthy food choices. Consider seeing a Reference registered dietitian Opens New Window for guidance and new food ideas.
- Forbid any child (yours included) to tease another child about weight. Talk to your child's teachers and/or counselors, if necessary.
|By:||Reference Healthwise Staff||Last Revised: Reference August 29, 2011|
|Medical Review:||Reference John Pope, MD - Pediatrics
Reference Rhonda O'Brien, MS, RD, CDE - Certified Diabetes Educator

20 Spring Crafts and Activities for Kids
Written by Jen Betterley
A favorite Montessori classroom lesson for children, this flower-arranging activity featured on Modern Parents Messy Kids is perfect for a little bit of "edutainment" while gathering your garden's spring blooms!
To get started, simply head outside with a basket to gather flowers or foliage and have a tray waiting inside with the following included: scissors, a small vase or two, a small water pitcher or cup, and a doily or two for a little extra decorative flair. Be sure to check out the rest of this post for four additional "introductory activities for the Montessori newbie." Lots of easy and neat ideas for plenty of learning fun at home!

Home > National Parks of Canada > Bear Management in the Rocky Mountain National Parks > Safety
Bear-human encounters are a risk for people and bears alike. The following information outlines how you can proactively reduce your risk of a bear encounter and, by so doing help conserve bears too.
The "Bare" Campsite Program
BEARS AND PEOPLE A Guide to Safety and Conservation on the Trail

We look at five technologies that look set to become part of every day lives very soon, to find out how they'll change our lives.
This technology could be a game-changer for device connectivity. A modern desktop computer today may include jacks to accommodate ethernet, USB 2.0, FireWire 400 or 800 (IEEE 1394a or 1394b) or both, DVI or DisplayPort or both, and - on some -eSATA.
USB 3.0 could eliminate all of these except ethernet. In their place, a computer may have several USB 3.0 ports, delivering data to monitors, retrieving it from scanners, and exchanging it with hard drives. The improved speed comes at a good time, as much-faster flash memory drives are in the pipeline.
USB 3.0 is fast enough to allow uncompressed 1080p video (currently our highest-definition video format) at 60 frames per second, says Jeff Ravencraft, president and chair of the USB-IF.
That would enable a camcorder to forgo video compression hardware and patent licensing fees for MPEG-4. The user could either stream video live from a simple camcorder (with no video processing required) or store it on an internal drive for later rapid transfer; neither of these methods is feasible today without heavy compression.
Citing 3.0's versatility, some analysts see the standard as a possible complement - or even alternative - to the consumer HDMI connection found on today's Blu-ray players.
The new USB flavor could also turn computers into real charging stations. Whereas USB 2.0 can produce 100 milliamperes (mA) of trickle charge for each port, USB 3.0 ups that quantity to 150mA per device. USB 2.0 tops out at 500mA for a hub; the maximum for USB 3.0 is 900mA.
With mobile phones moving to support USB as the standard plug for charging and syncing, the increased amperage of USB 3.0 might let you do away with wall warts (AC adapters) of all kinds.
In light of the increased importance and use of USB in its 3.0 version, future desktop computers may very well have two internal hubs, with several ports easily accessible in the front to act as a charging station.
Each hub could have up to six ports and support the full amperage. Meanwhile, laptop machines could multiply USB ports for better charging and access on the road.
(Apple's Mac Mini already includes five USB 2.0 ports on its back.)
The higher speed of 3.0 will accelerate data transfers, of course, moving more than 20GB of data per minute. This will make performing backups (and maintaining offsite backups) of increasingly large collections of images, movies, and downloaded media a much easier job.
Possible new applications for the technology include on-the-fly syncs and downloads (as described in the case study above).
The USB-IF's Ravencraft notes that customers could download movies at the gas pump at of a filling station.
"With high-speed USB [2.0], you couldn't have people waiting in line at 15 minutes a crack to download a movie," Ravencraft says.
Manufacturers are poised to take advantage of USB 3.0, and analysts predict mass adoption of the standard on computers within a couple of years.
The format will be popular in mobile devices and consumer electronics, as well. Ravencraft says that manufacturers currently sell more than 2 billion devices with built-in USB each year, so there's plenty of potential for getting the new standard out fast.
NEXT PAGE: Video streaming over Wi-Fi

A Brief Study of Story: Reading and Writing
We'll focus on the aspects of a story, plot, and characterization and help you develop them by reading your work. At each session, we'll do a free write and discuss the reading and writing. We'll read between one and three stories from people in the class and one story by a pro each week. There will be little points on grammar and style, adapted to the habits of the class.
There are currently no classes scheduled for this course. Please check back at a later time or contact WDCE to see when the course will be offered again.

is a C based interpreter (runloop) that executes, what different compiler (like Mildew ) produce.
If you want to help SMOP, you can just take on one of the lowlevel S1P implementations and write it. If you have any questions ask ruoso or pmurias at #perl6 @ irc.freenode.org.
The Slides for the talk Perl 6 is just a SMOP are available, it introduces a bit of the reasoning behind SMOP. A newer version of the talk presented at YAPC::EU 2008 is available
SMOP is an alternative implementation of a C engine to run Perl 6. It is focused in getting the most pragmatic approach possible, but still focusing in being able to support all Perl 6 features. Its core resembles Perl 5 in some ways, and it differs from Parrot in many ways, including the fact that SMOP is not a Virtual Machine. SMOP is simply a runtime engine that happens to have a interpreter run loop.
The main difference between SMOP and Parrot (besides the not-being-a-vm thing), is that SMOP is from bottom-up an implementation of the Perl 6 OO features, in a way that SMOP should be able to do a full bootstrap of the Perl 6 type system. Parrot on the other hand have a much more static low-level implementation (the PMC)
The same way PGE is a project on top of Parrot, SMOP will need a grammar engine for itself.
SMOP is the implementation that is stressing the meta object protocol more than any other implementation, and so far that has been a very fruitful exercise, with Larry making many clarifications on the object system thanks to SMOP.
Important topics on SMOP
- SMOP doesn't recurse in the C stack, and it doesn't actually define a mandatory paradigm (stack-based or register-based). SMOP has a Polymorphic Eval, that allows you to switch from one interpreter loop to another using Continuation Passing Style. See SMOP Stackless.
- SMOP doesn't define a object system in its own. The only thing it defines is the concept of SMOP Responder Interface, which then encapsulates whatever object system. This feature is fundamental to implement the SMOP Native Types.
- SMOP is intended to bootstrap itself from the low-level to the high-level. This is achieved by the fact that everything in SMOP is an Object. This way, even the low-level objects can be exposed to the high level runtime. See SMOP OO Bootstrap.
- SMOP won't implement a parser in its own, it will use STD or whatever parser gets ported to its runtime first.
- In order to enable the bootstrap, the runtime have a set of SMOP Constant Identifiers that are available for the sub-language compilers to use.
- There are some special SMOP Values Not Subject to Garbage Collection.
- A new interpreter implementation SMOP Mold replaced SLIME
- The "official" smop Perl 6 compiler is mildew - it lives in v6/mildew
- Currently there exists an old Elf backend which targets SMOP - it lives in misc/elfish/elfX
SMOP GSoC 2009
See the Old SMOP Changelog

Written by Jeff Mackey
Like many of you, we were appalled by photos that have surfaced showing a visibly terrified monkey crudely strapped into a
restraint device in which he was reportedly launched into space by the Iranian Space
Agency (ISA). Back in 2011, our friends at PETA U.K. urged agency head Dr. Hamid Fazeli to ground the misguided mission, pointing out that
nonhuman primates are no longer sent into space by the American or European
It appears that Iran is repeating the wasteful and cruel
mistakes that marked the darkest days of the space race. Monkeys are smart and
sensitive animals who not only are traumatized by the violence and noise of a
launch and landing but also suffer when caged in a laboratory before and after
a flight—if they survive.
the use of primates in space radiation experiments in the early 1990s, following
protests by PETA.
In 2010, NASA's plans to restart the program were canceled after PETA and others voiced strong ethical and scientific objections to the
Similarly, the European Space Agency (ESA) has a very active
space exploration program and has publicly stated that it "declines any interest in monkey research and does not consider
any need or use for such results." The ESA instead employs modern
technology such as state-of-the-art simulators to assess health risks for
Whether it happens in Iran or Ireland, in an underground
laboratory or in outer space, cruelly exploiting animals for specious science is indefensible. We've reached out to the ISA once again to ask it to stop shooting
monkeys into space. Learn how you can help stop experimentation on all animals.
you have a general question for PETA and would like a response, please e-mail Info@peta.org. If you need to report cruelty to
an animal, please click
here. If you are reporting an animal in imminent danger and know where to find the
animal and if the abuse is taking place right now, please call your local
police department. If the police are unresponsive, please call PETA
immediately at 757-622-7382 and press 2.
Follow PETA on Twitter!
Almost all of us grew up eating meat, wearing leather, and going to circuses and zoos. We never considered the impact of these actions on the animals involved. For whatever reason, you are now asking the question: Why should animals have rights? Read more.

Dropping a pound or two isn't necessarily a bad thing, especially if your pet's packing a few extra. But weight loss should be controlled, gradual and supervised by your veterinarian. Sudden, unexpected weight loss usually signals an underlying health problem. Cats, in particular, need frequent weight monitoring to prevent hepatic lipidosis, a debilitating liver disease.
Some pets lose weight in the heat of summer when rising temperatures curb their appetite. At the other extreme, you'll find some pets losing weight during frigid weather because they're burning more energy while trying to keep warm. Other common causes of weight loss include stress and lactation.
Healthy boarded pets may shed some pounds because of diet changes or the stress of a new environment, and nursing mothers burn more calories as their bodies produce milk. Although normal, these responses to environmental or lifestyle changes mean your pet uses and needs, more calories to meet increased energy requirements. Diet plays a crucial role in weight maintenance. Undernourishment and weight loss occur in pets who are fed poor-quality, inedible or spoiled food. Many underlying medical conditions such as dental disease, gastrointestinal disorders (including parasites), diabetes mellitus, liver or kidney disease, congestive heart failure and cancer make eating and absorbing nutrients difficult.
Other conditions, including hyperthyroidism, fever and chronic infections, increase your pet's metabolism and the rate she burns calories. The result can be dramatic weight loss.
What You Can Do at Home
A nutritious diet and lots of fresh water are your pet's best defenses against unwanted weight loss. Feed your pet the right amount of high-quality food that's appropriate for her life stage and activity level. And make sure she visits the veterinarian at least once a year for a thorough examination and parasite prevention.
When to Call the Veterinarian
See your veterinarian whenever your pet experiences unexplained weight loss. Call the doctor immediately if your pet exhibits additional symptoms such as vomiting, diarrhea, fever or increased thirst or urination.
Literally hundreds of conditions can cause weight loss in pets, so please be patient as the veterinarian makes his or her diagnosis.
Though some of these conditions are serious, most pets who have slimmed down quickly, soon return to their original weight with no complications.

These days, students come from all walks of life and enter college for a variety of reasons, and with a variety of expectations. Many of these students are acutely aware of the affect collegiate life will have on future career options, and use their college experiences to discover and refine a career path that will satisfy them. Other students are in the midst of their careers and either want to change career paths or are looking for job training to advance their careers.
Career planning is a valuable exercise for any of these students.
A good starting point in deciding what course of collegiate study would best prepare you for a career is to analyze very thoughtfully what particular skills are strengths for you. In general, are you adept at working with people, or numbers, or the written word, and so forth? What subjects in high school or activities since graduating have had the most appeal for you? You should make a list of the activities you enjoy and the subjects you like to read about or discuss.
Another valuable career planning activity is to read up on career information. Research careers that you are interested in and that would utilize your strengths. What type of education is required to get into the field? Do you need a graduate degree? Will you need to pursue a long internship or residency program? Are you willing to spend the time it takes to fulfill these requirements?
Remember, you don't have to have all the answers, but if you have an idea in mind, it can only help you. With possible careers in mind, you can research the college majors that are relevant. You can determine what colleges offer strong programs in your chosen majors, or if a career college would be a good option.

Hyperparathyroidism in Dogs
Excessive Levels of Parathyroid Hormone in the Blood in Dogs
The parathyroid hormone is responsible for regulating calcium and phosphorus levels in the blood, increasing blood calcium levels by causing calcium to be reabsorbed from bone. The parathyroid glands are small, hormone-secreting glands that are located on or near the thyroid glands. The term para- refers to adjacent or alongside, and thyroid refers to the actual thyroid gland; the thyroid and parathyroid glands are located side by side in the neck, near the windpipe or trachea. Hyperparathyroidism is a medical condition related to the parathyroid glands, in which over active parathyroid glands cause abnormally high levels of parathyroid hormone (also known as parathormone or PTH) to circulate in the blood.
Primary hyperparathyroidism refers to a condition in which a tumor in the parathyroid gland produces excessive levels of parathyroid hormone, leading to increased blood calcium levels (hypercalcemia).
Secondary hyperparathyroidism can be caused by a deficiency of calcium and vitamin D, and is associated with malnutrition or long-term (chronic) kidney disease.
There is no known genetic cause for primary hyperparathyroidism, but its association with certain breeds suggests a possible hereditary basis in some cases. Secondary hyperparathyroidism can develop in association with hereditary kidney disease (known as hereditary nephropathy), but is not inherited per se. Keeshonds seem to show some predilection for this disease. In dogs, the average age is ten years, with a range of 5 to 15 years of age.
Symptoms and Types
Your veterinarian will be looking for cancer first and foremost for the cause for this disease. However, several other possibilities will also be considered, such as renal failure and vitamin D intoxication, which have been known to be found in some rodenticides. Other possibilities are too much calcium in the blood. A urinalysis will reveal calcium and phosphate levels.
Serum ionized calcium determination is often normal in patients with chronic renal failure and high in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism or hypercalcemia that is associated with a malignancy. If kidney stones are suspected, your veterinarian may use X-ray and ultrasound imaging of the parathyroid gland to discover whether there is tumor there. If nothing can be found using these diagnostic techniques, your veterinarian may need to use surgery to explore the area of the thyroid and parathyroid.
The failure of the kidneys to perform their proper functions
A gland found in the neck of humans and animals that secretes glands responsible for metabolic rate, calcitonin, and others.
An in-depth examination of the properties of urine; used to determine the presence or absence of illness
The name for four glands that are located on the top of the thyroid gland that help to regulate the amount of calcium in the blood
The windpipe; it carries air from the bronchi to the mouth
The hormone that is created from the parathyroid glands; helps to regulate the calcium level of an animal’s blood
Something with an electrical charge
Something that becomes worse or life threatening as it spreads
A condition of poor health that results from poor feeding or no feeding at all
A low level of calcium in the blood
Excess Calcium in the Blood in Dogs
Parathyroid hormone and vitamin D interactions work to release calcium from the bones,...
Overproduction of Estrogen in Dogs
Overproduction of estrogen can result in what is known as estrogen toxicity (hyperestrogenism)....
Latest In Dog Nutrition
Five Life-Lengthening Health Tips for Your ...
Anyone who has ever had a dog or cat wishes just one thing — that he or she has a...
How Antioxidants Improve Our Pet's Health, ...
The science behind pet nutrition continues to make major advances. One such example...

The process of accretion is important in the formation of planets, stars, and black holes; it is also believed to power some of the most energetic phenomena in the universe. In an accretion disc, the accretion rate is controlled by the outward transport of angular momentum. Collisional processes like friction or viscosity are typically too small to account for the observed rates, and it is universally believed that astrophysical accretion discs are turbulent. However the origin of this turbulence is not clear since discs with velocity profiles close to Keplerian are stable to infinitesimal perturbations. In the early nineties it was realized that the stability picture changes dramatically if magnetic fields or nonlinear effects are present. In this talk I will describe how some of these issues can be discussed within the framework of the flow of a conducting fluid between coaxial rotating cylinders. I will also describe some of the experiments that are on the way to study these flows as well as the computational efforts to clarify the nature of the ensuing turbulent transport.
ANL Physics Division Colloquium Schedule

Exposure to vehicle exhaust emissions can cause serious health problems for your employees.
At Plymovent, we know what the danger of exposure to hazardous exhaust fumes can be. We continuously review safety management guidelines and listen to what the independent experts have to say:
- OSHA – The Occupational Safety and Health Administration has set a permissible exposure limit of 1 part of Benzene per million parts of air (1 ppm) in the workplace during an 8-hour workday, 40-hour workweek.
- The EPA has classified benzene as a Group A carcinogen.
- CDC – The Centers for Disease Control & Prevention reports that exhaust from any improperly maintained vehicle can pose serious hazards.The most common source of carbon monoxide is automobile exhaust vented in confined spaces. Proper ventilation and prevention of carbon monoxide build-up in confined spaces must be assured.
- NIOSH – The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, states that there can be no safe level of exposure to a carcinogen; therefore NIOSH’s Threshold Limit Value is “lowest feasible level.”
Plymovent systems are designed to meet or exceed the standards of the most exacting health and safety codes –worldwide!

The Palisades Museum of Prehistory (PMOP), incorporated in Washington DC, is a non-profit regional organization dedicated to promoting the awareness and preservation of prehistoric artifacts in the Palisades of Washington DC.
The PMOP will accomplish its mission by providing information, education, and archaeological guidance.
In addition to curation and preservation of prehistoric artifacts, the PMOP will assemble a library of archaeological records, maps, and surveys pertinent to the region’s prehistory. These records are now housed in disparate locations e.g. universities, National Park Service, State Historic Preservation Offices, Smithsonian archives. The localized information will be made available in the museum located in the Palisades of Washington DC.
More interest in our prehistory will hopefully allow the PMOP to organize a volunteer network that can react rapidly to events exposing our prehistory - like road works, building excavations, and erosion.
The bulk of prehistoric data remains locked up in government agencies and academic institutions. Many in the archaeological profession believe that releasing this information will encourage people to collect artifacts on federal lands. However well-intentioned, this mindset continues to exact a toll on the prehistoric record. Ignorance of history will guarantee the obliteration of the archeological record as more development continues with little regard to the people who onced lived here.
By providing the public access to the archaeological record, PMOP will boost awareness of our area's human history. In the end, both professionals and public will benefit from the increase of knowledge.
Because our region’s prehistory spans at least 12,000 years, waves of indigenous cultures have come and gone dispersing evidence over broad geographic areas. The ravages of time have thinned much of that evidence. By recovering more evidence over a broader area, and making that information public, the PMOP hopes to raise awareness and understanding of those who lived here for thousands of years.
In terms of human evolution, the formative years of our species existed in lithic cultures. By greatly expanding the knowledge base of those cultures, the Palisades Museum of Prehistory hopes to shed light on our human nature.

July 24, 2009
Mark S. Blumberg is Professor and Starch Faculty Fellow at the University of Iowa. His books include The Oxford Handbook of Developmental Behavioral Neuroscience, Body Heat: Temperature and Life on Earth, and Basic Instinct: The Genesis of Behavior. He is Editor-in-Chief of the journal Behavioral Neuroscience, and President of the International Society for Developmental Psychobiology. His newest book is Freaks of Nature: What Anomalies Tell Us About Development and Evolution.
In this conversation with D.J. Grothe, Mark Blumberg describes how he became interested in "freaks of nature" as a way to question prevailing concepts within biology regarding genes, instincts, and pre-formed abilities. He talks about why he sees genetic determinism as "action at a distance thinking," and why he thinks it is similar to creationist views, and describes both as "magical ways of thinking about nature." He explains epigenetics. He describes how certain non-genetic factors that shape behavior may be inherited from one generation to the next. He discusses "sexual freaks" and sexual ambiguity in nature, and shows how in many ways, it is the norm in nature. He predicts the extinction of creationist thinking, and talks about how freaks of nature are a missed opportunity for those science advocates battling intelligent design and creationism, even as he also criticizes belief in "evolution's design" and "magical genes." He contrasts his views with those of evolutionary psychology as regards brain development. And he responds to notable critics of his views, such as Jerry Coyne.
Books Mentioned in This Episode:
Basic Instinct: The Genesis of Behavior Mark S. Blumberg
February 27, 2009

by Virginia B. Hargrove
The fish tank at the dentist's draws my kids like a magnet. They excitedly tell one another stories about each fish. Little kids...big imaginations.
As I waited through their appointments, I thought about a nifty way to put those active imaginations to work!
When we got home, we were going to create an edible aquarium in a cup! This is one "pet" you won't have to worry about!
What better way to celebrate National Jello Week February 12-18!
• Clear plastic or glass containers
• A skewer or small plastic makeup paddle
• 2 cups lemon-lime flat soda
• 1 tablespoon unflavored gelatin
• 2 drops blue food coloring
• Small colorful candy for the gravel
• Fish shaped crackers, gummy fish, or other edible "ocean" critters
Blossom your gelatin. Isn't that a descriptive term? I expect to see those little granules open up into roses...or for this project into sea anemones. It means to sprinkle the gelatin evenly over 1/4 cup soda (or water), and let stand five minutes to soften.
Place 1/2 cup soda in a small saucepan over medium heat. Heat just to boiling. Add the softened gelatin, stirring to dissolve the gelatin completely over the heat, about 2 minutes. Remove from heat.
Add the remaining soda and food coloring, and stir to combine. Pour the liquid into a bowl. Transfer to the refrigerator to chill until partially set. You want it to be a little thick, but still mushy and movable but not watery. Fish placed in the middle of the aquarium should stay there. Check every 15 minutes
Once your fish bowl "water" thickens, call the kids! Empty some "gravel" (colorful candies) into each container. Then gently spoon in the gelatin solution. Fill it up to the desired water level.
Now for the fun! Hand out a skewer or small make-up paddle to each child. Show how to use it to push candies into the "water."
Sit back and watch (or make your own) as they load up their cups. Use gummy worms for eels, stick fish or seaweed. Add gummy fish and top it off with a gummy life preserver.
Once your child's happy with the fish bowl, place it in the refrigerator until completely set. Then eat and enjoy!
Caution: Each time our kids raved about this project to their friends, we had to set up another fish bowl making day!
Do you have a project that seems to attract the entire neighborhood? Please share it with us.
Copyright © Pregnancy.org.

A Fertility Specialist Tells You About This Medication Used In The Treatment Of Infertility
Mark Kan, MD
What is Clomid, and how does it work?
The expert answers
Clomiphene citrate (also known as Clomid or Serophene) is a medication that is commonly used in fertility treatment. Because it is relatively inexpensive and can be administered orally, clomiphene is generally one of the first medications prescribed for patients who do not ovulate regularly.
In women who do ovulate regularly, clomiphene may be used for "superovulation," where 2 or 3 eggs are produced. This increases the number of "targets" for the sperm, thereby increasing the chance of pregnancy.
Clomiphene is normally administered for five days during the follicular part of the cycle (the portion of the cycle following menstrual bleeding). Clomiphene is structurally similar to estrogen and acts on the estrogen receptor. First approved by the FDA in 1967, it has recently been reclassified as a selective-estrogen-receptor-modulator (SERM).
How does clomiphene work? The hormonal signals that cause the ovarian follicles to grow are released from the pituitary gland. These hormones are named Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) and Leutinizing Hormone (LH) for their actions in the ovary. The pituitary receives its signals from the hypothalamus in the brain. Clomiphene blocks the estrogen receptor and "tricks" the brain into thinking there are low levels of estrogen. The pituitary responds by releasing more FSH and LH, thus stimulating follicular growth in the ovaries.
Whereas clomiphene "tricks" the pituitary into producing more FSH and LH, gonadotropin injections of FSH and LH increase the amount of signals directly. Treatment with these injections requires more intensive monitoring than does therapy with clomiphene. In general, treatment with fertility medications is initiated to help women overcome ovulatory dysfunction, or to produce multiple eggs so there is a higher chance of achieving pregnancy.
In the "Clomiphene citrate challenge test" (CCCT), clomiphene is administered and FSH levels are compared before and after treatment. In theory, clomiphene blocks the negative feedback of estrogen, leaving only inhibin (a substance that inhibits FSH) to suppress FSH. In some women, inhibin alone is not able to block the high levels of FSH without the help of estrogen. The CCCT will therefore be abnormal and show high FSH levels after clomiphene in women with diminished ovarian reserve.
While the CCCT may help to identify some patients with diminished ovarian reserve, there is no single test that can predict which patients can or cannot become pregnant.

While writing dissertation framing a layout can prove to be very help. In a dissertation the writer has to put all his/ her experiences learned through different incidents occured in life on the paper. In a dissertation one has to bring all his logical abilities onto the paper. One has to conclude based on his leanings on the topic through out his life. This becomes tough when you are writing straight from your mind. Thus before proceeding with the dissertation framing of outline will give you clear picture of what the final result is going to like. Plan all the parts in the outline that is going to be included in the dissertation and prevent any future disasters.
There are two key points that will help you getting the perfect dissertation:
A. Dissertation proposal:
A brief background to the proposed study
- Review of the Literature
- Theoretical Model (if used)
- Statement of the Problem
Design of the Study
- Hypotheses or Questions
- Definition of Terms
- Population and Sample
- Data Collection
- Significance of the Study
- Limitations of the Study
- How are you going to analyse the data, tools that you are going to use and how are going to represent it?
- What kinds of operations will you put the data through to result in your findings?
Important points you should remember:
- The proposal should not be very lengthy, a maximum of 20 pages will work out perfectly.
- More emphasis should be given to review of literature and the research design. Lets say half of the proposal should talk about review of literature and another half about research design.
- Must go through several sample dissertation before submitting the proposal.
B. Outline of the project
This outline can be modified as per the university’s requirement of submisson:
Chapter I (Introduction)
- Background of the study
- Problem statement
- Purpose of the study
- Research questions
- Hypothesis or objectives
Chapter II (Review of literature)
- Review of empirical studies.
Chapter III (Research Methodology)
- Research design
- Sample size
- Instruments to be used for computation of data
- Data analysis
Chapter IV (Data analysis & results)
Chapter V (Conclusion)
- Final findings of the study
- Interpretation of results
- Limiations of the study
Finally at the end its the refferences and appendices. Its crucial to properly mention all the reffered material and calculation sheets here.
Now that you have unlocked the secrets of writing a dissertation. Now start up your work, without even thinking of messing it up.

judgments on teaching and other inadequacies. They learned, too, to demand structural changes to benefit their children. This was most evident in the Wisconsin desegregation cases.
An increasingly critical activism by parents suggested that Hmong were learning how to contend for improved schools in the American mode. Civil rights approaches were being utilized by Hmong. In Laos, the problem for parents was to get governmental authorities to build and conduct schools for Hmong children. In the United States, the schools existed but operated unequally.
Questia, a part of Gale, Cengage Learning. www.questia.com
Publication information: Book title: Asian-American Education:Historical Background and Current Realities. Contributors: Meyer Weinberg - Author. Publisher: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Place of publication: Mahwah, NJ. Publication year: 1997. Page number: 199.
This material is protected by copyright and, with the exception of fair use, may not be further copied, distributed or transmitted in any form or by any means.

Caspian countries come together to discuss protection of the Caspian Sea, Turkmenbashy, Turkmenistan
Malheureusement, il n'y a pas de version française de ce document.
On 5 and 6 November 2012, the Caspian Ecological Forum, hosted by Tukmenistan’s Ministry of Nature Protection, was held along the shores of the Caspian Sea in the Avaza national tourist zone, not far from the Turmenbashy Bay Ramsar Site.
|Turmenbashy Bay Ramsar Site (© Ramsar Secretariat)|
Turkmenistan acceded to the Ramsar Convention in 2009 and designated 267,124 ha of the Hazar Nature Reserve as a wetland of International Importance under the name ‘Turkmenbashy Bay Ramsar Site’. Turkmenistan now has a Ramsar Working Group made up of experts and representatives of the Ministry of Nature Protection.
The event provided a platform for constructive dialogue and cooperation for the wise use of the resource-rich Caspian Sea. The forum was attended by representatives of environmental and fisheries agencies and academics of the Caspian countries, with delegations from Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia and Turkmenistan. Representatives of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Convention on Combating Desertification (UNCCD), as well as oil and gas companies operating in the Caspian shelf also participated in the forum.
The Caspian Sea is the world's largest landlocked water body; with its particular climatic and salinity gradients and its isolation, it is home to about 400 endemic species, including the world's largest herd of sturgeon (90 percent of the world reserves) and the endangered Caspian Seal Pusa caspica.
Following the early days of the Caspian Environment Programme in 1995, The Framework Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Caspian Sea (Tehran Convention) was ratified by the Caspian littoral states in 2006. It is the first legally binding regional agreement ratified by all five Caspian states, and defines the general requirements and institutional mechanism for the protection of the marine environment of the Caspian Sea. Four protocols to the Convention have currently been developed by the countries, they focus on biodiversity conservation; land-based sources of pollution; preparedness, response and cooperation in combating oil pollution incidents; and environmental impact assessment in a transboundary context.
The Ramsar Secretariat would like to thank Turkmenistan for the invitation and generous hospitality, and for its dedication to ecological conservation, and expresses its readiness to assist and support all Caspian states for the wise use and protection of the Caspian Sea.
Report by Nessrine Alzahlawi, Assistant Advisor for Asia-Oceania

Titan's Ethane Lake
This artist concept shows a mirror-smooth lake on the surface of the smoggy moon Titan.
Cassini scientists have concluded that at least one of the large lakes observed on Saturn's moon Titan contains liquid hydrocarbons, and have positively identified ethane. This result makes Titan the only place in our solar system beyond Earth known to have liquid on its surface.
The Cassini-Huygens mission is a cooperative project of NASA, the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, a division of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, manages the mission for NASA's Science Mission Directorate, Washington, D.C. The Cassini orbiter was designed, developed and assembled at JPL.
For more information about the Cassini-Huygens mission visit http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov.

History of the Indians of the United States
by Angie Debo
The political, social, and military conflicts and foul-ups between the Indians and whites from the colonial era to the 1970s.
6 x 9 450 pages, index, maps, illustrated, paperbound
#300 Indians in the US $24.95
by Barry C. Kent
Culturally and linguistically, the Susquehannocks closely resembled the Iroquois of New York state. Actually, they were a fiercely independent nation that lived along the Susquehanna River in Pennsylvania and Maryland. They often invaded the tribes of lower Maryland. This is a detailed narrative of the Susquehannocks' lifestyle, villages,
and artifacts. Also describes their relationship with the Conestogas, Conoy, Shawnee, Delaware, and other tribes that lived along the river.
6" x 9" 440 pages, index, illustrated, maps, paperbound
#372 Susquehanna's Indians $16.95
Indians and World War II
by Alison R. Bernstein
The impact of World War II on Indian affairs was more provound and lasting than that of any other event or policy, including FDR's Indian New Deal and eforts to terminate federal responsibility for tribes under Eisenhower. Focusing on the period from 1941 to 1947, Bernstein explains why termination and tribal self-determination wer logical results of the Indians' World War II experiences in battle and on the home front. Includes a brief story of the Navajo Marine Codetalkers and Ira Hayes, a Pima Indian who helped raise the flag at Iwo Jima.
5½" x 8½" 247 pages, index, some photos, paperbound
#373 Indians & WWII $19.95
FAX: 717 464-3250

Physical Activity at School
RWJF Priority: Increase the time, intensity and duration of physical activity during the school day and out-of-school programs
Schools play a critical role in helping children lead active, healthy lives. By requiring active participation in daily physical education classes, providing activity breaks throughout the day, and supporting walking and bicycling to school, schools can increase students’ physical activity. After-school programs located in schools, parks and recreational centers also can develop innovative ways to help children be active.
The resources below, from RWJF grantees and partners, highlight recent efforts to examine and develop programs and policies that help children be active before, during and after the school day.

Long ago Fisher-Man lived with his elder brothers in a sweat-house, they say. Now he said to the Cottontail people, "Ye must remain at home, ye must stay here! I shall go away. Ye must stay close, must not go about. Thither, in that direction, I shall go in the morning." Then he went.
Now, all those people, those boys, staid there. He had explained to them when he would return. "So many times dawning, at the sixth dawning I (shall) have returned," said he, "if other people do not choke me on the road. Do ye stay there close (at home)." So they staid.
In the morning one of them crawled out when it was dawning. After he had sat a while, standing up, (he went and) sat on the edge of the smoke-hole. Now opposite, they say, that Wood-Rat lived in a sweat-house with his grandmother. From thence Wood-Rat crawled out. "How are you?" said he, said Wood-Rat.
"Ugly Wood-Rat-Man, defecating on his grandmother's blanket, stinking, defecating all over the house, urinating all about, dirty-acting Wood-Rat!" said (Cottontail). "His
p. 220 p. 221
house stinks," he said. Then Wood-Rat-Man said, "Ham, ham! My grandmother, bring out my net! He calls me very bad names." Then she brought it out.
Then, having walked over, he stretched it across the door of the house. Then he stamped on the house (Cottontail's). He kept stamping, and then one (of the Cottontails) jumped out; and just as he did so, he was caught in the net. After a while, after he had gotten into (the net), Wood-Rat carried him across. And carrying him home, when he had carried him in, his grandmother skinned (the Cottontail) and cooked him; and, roasting him, they both had breakfast.
Next morning, crawling out, Wood-Rat said, "Halloo!" Then one (of the Cottontails) stuck his head out. "Dirty, ugly Wood-Rat, defecating on his grandmother, urinating about, making things dirty, Wood-Rat, who stays where he has made it stink!" said he. Then he jumped in again.
Then, "Ham, ham!" said (Wood-Rat). "He speaks evilly of me! My grandmother, hand out my net!" Thereupon he went over, and having gone over, and stretched the net in the doorway, he stamped, kept stamping, (on the roof). Then one (of the Cottontails) rushed out, and so was caught in the net. Meanwhile, having got him into the net, Wood-Rat carried him off. He carried him over to his grandmother; and, having given him to her, she skinned him, and they both had breakfast.
Next morning, again, Wood-Rat crawled out. Then. he said, "Siī!" Then one (of the Cottontails) stuck his head out repeatedly. "Bad Wood-Rat, defecating on his grandmother's blanket, one who does dirty things, urinating all about the house, Wood-Rat, who does dirty things that make things stink!" he said. Then Wood-Rat said, "Ham, ham, ham! He calls me very bad names. Hurry and give me my net, my grandmother!" Then she gave it to him.
p. 222 p. 223
Having gone over, he stretched it in the doorway, and then stamped on the house, kept stamping. By and by one rushed out, and was caught in the net. Then, having got him into the net, he carried him over. Meanwhile only one (Cottontail) was left, (who) had crawled over behind the fireplace. Now, Wood-Rat, having carried (the one he had caught) over, they skinned him, roasted him, and had their breakfast.
Next morning, again, (Wood-Rat) crawled out. "Sh!" he said. But no one stuck out his head. Then said he, "There are none left. I have killed them all." Next morning, again, (Wood-Rat) stuck his head out. "Hiī," he said. Again no one looked out. "Well, my grandmother, I think I have killed them all," he said. "I did not see any, none crawled out." Then he remained there. Next day again he looked out. "Sī!" he said, but nobody looked out. "I guess I have killed them all," he said.
That night, as it grew dark, Fisher-Man returned. He crawled in, and then (found) all had gone. Then one crawled out toward him from behind the fire, and said, "Wood-Rat chased us; and when he stamped on the house, (the others) ran out, and then he killed them," he said. "He continued doing this until he killed them all. I alone, not jumping out, (but) hiding and not moving, have kept alive." Then Fisher-Man said, "Hō!"
In the morning Fisher went after him (Wood-Rat). Crossing over, he reached (the house), and, having crawled in, he killed both, grandmother and grandson. Then he spoke. "Now you are Wood-Rat-Man! Not bothering people, you shall live and run about where rocks lie all around, doing no harm to people," said he. "And mortal men shall say of you, 'Long ago Wood-Rat was a bad man.' So mortal men (will) tell of you." Then he went over, and, having returned to his house, remained there.
p. 224 p. 225
In the morning, having fixed his bow, and having taken three quivers full of arrows, he went off. He went towards the east, and kept going, kept going. His brothers staid under a bush. Then, after he had gone some ways, he hung up one quiver of arrows, and went on. He kept going, kept going, and then a little ways off he hung up another quiver of arrows. He went on, kept going, and again a short ways off he came to a valley, a large valley.
When he had looked down into it here and there, (he saw) there were brown bears feeding, and grizzly bears also feeding, it is said. One was feeding there in the very middle (of the valley). And it was a white bear, it is said, a silver-tip. So he (Fisher), having crept down into (the valley), ready to shoot, shot him.
Then from there (the bear) ran after him, jumped at him, trying to catch him. And he (Fisher) ran up out of the valley. Meanwhile he kept shooting, and still continued to run up out of the valley, the bear jumping at him to seize him. He kept shooting; he shot dodging from side to side, he shot whatever he had (?).
Meanwhile (the bear) jumped at him to seize him in his mouth. He (Fisher) kept running away and when all his arrows were shot, he reached the place where he had left the arrows, and, taking them down, he ran on up. He kept on shooting, and still (the bear) jumped at him to seize him in his mouth. Again it seems as if he came a little closer. He (Fisher) ran, dodging all the time, dodged as he ran. And meanwhile he shot. Only half his arrows were left, he had almost shot them all away.
Meanwhile he ran on, he dodged, he shot. And, so doing, he shot all his arrows. And all being gone, he ran to the place where he had hung tip his arrows, and, having taken them down, he shot. The bear jumped to seize him in his arms, (but,) dodging as he ran, (Fisher) kept
p. 226 p. 227
shooting. So continually shooting, (the bear) coming running up pretty close, he shot, dodging as he ran. And, so doing, he ran round and about the place where he had made his brothers stay. Meanwhile (the bear) still ran after him. And while he was doing thus, he (Fisher) killed him.
Then he spoke. "You shall be bad. You shall not trouble mortal men when they see you," he said, speaking after he had killed him. "You shall not hunt to seize mortal men coming into the middle of this world. That, mortal men in story-telling, (shall say) of you. Then, 'Silver-Tip in the olden time killed people, (was) a killer, they say. Killing them, he was sent away from this world, they say. And then, they say, there were no Silver-Tips.' That (is what) mortal men (will) be saying of you," he said.
Then he said, "Well, my brother! You must live on, staying in this sort of a place, staying squatting down under bushes. I shall be a traveller in this world in all countries; but you will be one who shall stay travelling about in this country only, going about only in this country," said he, speaking. Then he went on. "Well," said he, "I am going," said he. "Stay there!" said he, and he went off. And when he looked back, the ears (of the Cottontail) were shimmering (quivering?). So he went off, after looking back. That is all, it is said.

|Product #: EMC2806035_TQ|
Roots: migr, cert, capit (Resource Book Only) eBookGrade 6
Please Note: This ebook is a digital download, NOT a physical product. After purchase, you will be provided a one time link to download ebooks to your computer. Orders paid by PayPal require up to 8 business hours to verify payment and release electronic media. For immediate downloads, payment with credit card is required.
This Vocabulary Fundamentals unit for grade 6+ provides three activity pages in which students learn about and use Greek and Latin root words to form words and understand their meaning. (For example, 'migr' = to change/move: migrate; 'capit' = to head: capital; 'civ' = city: civil; 'cert' = sure: certain; 'crit' = to judge or diminish: critical). Includes answer key.
Submit a review

|Product #: SDLSE91180002K_TQ|
SMART Board E-Lessons for Grammar and Usage: Direct and Indirect Objects eBookGrade 9|Grade 10|Grade 11|Grade 12
Please Note: This ebook is a digital download, NOT a physical product. After purchase, you will be provided a one time link to download ebooks to your computer. Orders paid by PayPal require up to 8 business hours to verify payment and release electronic media. For immediate downloads, payment with credit card is required.
Easy-to-use interactive whiteboard lessons for differentiated instruction in Language Arts. Lesson activities are powered by SMART Notebook collaborative learning software. Two levels are offered for differentiated instruction, middle school grades (4 to 8) and high school grades (9 to 12). Each grade covers the same basic topics, with the high school level being a little more advanced. Each screen provides answers to check the students work. Each lesson has 14 screens of instructions and activities. Lessons for the interactive whiteboard are aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS).
Submit a review

Brazilian Journal of Microbiology
versión impresa ISSN 1517-8382
KONIETZNY, Ursula y GREINER, Ralf. The application of PCR in the detection of mycotoxigenic fungi in foods. Braz. J. Microbiol. [online]. 2003, vol.34, n.4, pp. 283-300. ISSN 1517-8382. http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S1517-83822003000400001.
It is estimated that 25 to 50% of the crops harvested worldwide are contaminated with mycotoxins. Because of the toxic and carcinogenic potential of mycotoxins, there is an urgent need to develop detection methods that are rapid and highly specific. The highly advanced physico-chemical methods for the analysis of mycotoxins in use, have the disadvantage that highly sophisticated clean-up and/or derivatization procedures must be applied. An alternative could be the detection of the mycotoxigenic moulds themselves, especially as molecular techniques have been introduced recently as powerful tools for detecting and identifying fungi. PCR methods for the detection of aflatoxigenic Aspergilli, patulin-producing Penicillum and trichothecene- as well as fumonisin-producing Fusaria strains have been described. The usefulness of the PCR methods developed so far to monitor quality and safety in the food an feed industry was already demonstrated. Thus, PCR may be applied to the screening of agricultural commodities for the absence of mycotoxin producers prior to or even after processing. Negative results in this assay indicate that a sample should be virtually free of mycotoxins. Only the positive samples left must be analyzed for the presence of mycotoxins using physico-chemical standard methods. This review does not only summarize the so far developed qualitative and quantitative PCR assays for the detection of mycotoxigenic fungi in agricultural commodities, foods and animal feeds, but describes also strategies to develop new specific PCR assays for such a detection.
Palabras llave : aflatoxin; fumonisin; patulin; polymerase chain reaction; trichothecene.

Bulletin of the World Health Organization
versión impresa ISSN 0042-9686
LANSANG, Mary Ann y DENNIS, Rodolfo. Building capacity in health research in the developing world. Bull World Health Organ [online]. 2004, vol.82, n.10, pp. 764-770. ISSN 0042-9686. http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S0042-96862004001000012.
Strong national health research systems are needed to improve health systems and attain better health. For developing countries to indigenize health research systems, it is essential to build research capacity. We review the positive features and weaknesses of various approaches to capacity building, emphasizing that complementary approaches to human resource development work best in the context of a systems and long-term perspective. As a key element of capacity building, countries must also address issues related to the enabling environment, in particular: leadership, career structure, critical mass, infrastructure, information access and interfaces between research producers and users. The success of efforts to build capacity in developing countries will ultimately depend on political will and credibility, adequate financing, and a responsive capacity-building plan that is based on a thorough situational analysis of the resources needed for health research and the inequities and gaps in health care. Greater national and international investment in capacity building in developing countries has the greatest potential for securing dynamic and agile knowledge systems that can deliver better health and equity, now and in the future.
Palabras llave : Health services research [organization and administration]; Education, Graduate; Staff development; Investments; Access to information; Social justice; Academies and institutes; Interinstitutional relations; Developing countries; Developed countries.

Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs, also known as prion diseases) are a group of progressive conditions that affect the brain and nervous system of humans and animals and are transmitted by prions..
For more information about the topic Transmissible spongiform encephalopathy, read the full article at Wikipedia.org, or see the following related articles:
Editor's Note: This article is not intended to provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.
Recommend this page on Facebook, Twitter,
and Google +1:
Other bookmarking and sharing tools:

Oct. 9, 1998 COLUMBIA, Mo.--Ducks, geese and bald eagles soaring over areas the size of small towns are envisioned when talking about federally protected wetlands, not areas that are maybe as big as a small swimming pool and apparently void of life. University of Missouri-Columbia Professor Ray Semlitsch is trying to change that view and explain the importance of smaller wetlands before they are managed out of existence.
"Large wetlands are beautiful and need to be protected, but for some animal species such as frogs, toads and salamanders, it is small wetlands that support greater species diversity," said Semlitsch, who along with his graduate research assistant, Russ Bodie, recently published their research in Conservation Biology. "These smaller, temporary wetlands--because they are dry at certain times during the year--are much harder to appreciate than vast marsh areas. But without these smaller wetlands, it is very possible that much of the animal and plant life that make wetlands rich, productive habitats would not survive. We need to worry about the conservation of smaller wetlands as well as the larger ones."
Small wetlands currently are defined as being less than 4 hectares, or about 8 to 9 acres. The majority of the nation's wetlands are much smaller than might be imagined, closer to 1 to 2 acres and sometimes as small as several square yards. These small wetlands may comprise the majority of wetlands in the United States and help support a vast diversity of wetland species. However, unlike the large wetlands, these smaller areas are not protected to the same extent.
Recently, the Army Corp of Engineers, which manages wetlands of all sizes throughout the United States, drafted regulations that will change the way wetlands are managed in the future. They have put off any change in management regulations until April, but the MU researchers argue that the changes in the regulations could manage these smaller wetlands out of existence.
"Right now we can't detect losses of small wetlands by satellite imagery, a technique used to assess environmental change," Bodie said. "We lose thousands of acres each year in wetlands and these smaller ones are not even taken into account. Yet, they play a vital role in the ecosystem and support a great variety of organisms."
Research done by Semlitsch and Bodie has indicated that when some individuals of a species move between wetlands, this increases their chances of survival. By populating many different wetlands, various species thrive, even during drought years when some wetlands are dry. When smaller wetlands are destroyed, the chances of survival for many species' populations may decrease dramatically because distances between individual wetlands become longer, making movement between wetlands more difficult. These small wetland breeding sites for amphibians are especially critical in light of purported world-wide declines, Semlitsch said.
Wetlands in general also have direct benefits to humans as they filter out chemicals and silt, buffer lands from flooding, and are a favorite of hunters and fishers. They also are very costly and difficult to develop for construction or other purposes.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
The above story is reprinted from materials provided by University Of Missouri, Columbia.
Note: Materials may be edited for content and length. For further information, please contact the source cited above.
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

Sep. 3, 2008 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill researchers have demonstrated that a drug called ondansetron helps reduce vomiting, the need for intravenous fluids and hospital admissions in children with acute gastroenteritis.
Gastroenteritis is an infection, often caused by a virus, that causes vomiting and diarrhea. It is often popularly called “stomach flu” and is a very common ailment in children during the winter months.
“Children under the age of 5 years generally have between one and three episodes of gastroenteritis each year,” said Dr. Lisa Ross DeCamp, lead author of the study, which is published in the September 2008 issue of Archives of Pediatric & Adolescent Medicine
“And about one of every 25 children in the country will be hospitalized for gastroenteritis by the time they’re 5,” said DeCamp who was a chief resident at the N.C. Children’s Hospital at the time of the study but now works at the University of Michigan.
In the emergency department at UNC Hospitals, five to 10 children a day are seen with symptoms of gastroenteritis, said Dr. Michael J. Steiner, assistant professor of pediatrics and a co-author of the study.
Persistent vomiting from acute gastroenteritis can be very frightening to children and their families and also poses a risk of dehydration. Current practice guidelines do not recommend that doctors give medications to children with gastroenteritis, but several recent studies suggest that ondansetron might be helpful.
In addition, Steiner said, many doctors are already prescribing ondansetron “off-label” for children with gastroenteritis. It has not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for that indication, although it is approved for treating nausea caused by chemotherapy in cancer patients.
To find out if there was valid scientific support for giving antiemetics to children with gastroenteritis, DeCamp, Steiner and two UNC colleagues -- Dr. Julie S. Byerly, assistant professor of pediatrics, and medical student Nipa Doshi -- conducted a systematic review of all the medical literature studying the use of antiemetics for gastroenteritis.
The 11 identified previously published studies evaluated the safety and effectiveness of seven different antiemetics that were given to children seen in hospital emergency departments. The authors found that antiemetics other than ondansetron should not be used in children with gastroenteritis.
A meta-analysis (a statistical way to combine different studies) found that ondansetron, which is sold under the brand name Zofran and is available as an intravenous infusion, tablet, disintegrating tablet or in liquid forms, reduced further vomiting after receipt in the emergency department. Importantly, it also reduced the likelihood that children would require intravenous fluids by nearly two-thirds, and halved the risk of immediate hospital admission. Ondansetron also had one down side: It was found to increase diarrhea in 3 of the 6 studies. However, the authors found this increased diarrhea did not appear to cause an increased need for further medical care.
The UNC researchers concluded that future treatment guidelines should recommend the use of ondansetron in select children with gastroenteritis.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
Note: Materials may be edited for content and length. For further information, please contact the source cited above.
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

Nov. 27, 2009 Physicists from the Japanese-led multi-national T2K neutrino collaboration have just announced that over the weekend they detected the first neutrino events generated by their newly built neutrino beam at the J-PARC (Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex) accelerator laboratory in Tokai, Japan.
Protons from the 30-GeV Main Ring synchrotron were directed onto a carbon target, where their collisions produced charged particles called pions. These pions travelled through a helium-filled volume where they decayed to produce a beam of the elusive particles called neutrinos. These neutrinos then flew 200 metres through the earth to a sophisticated detector system capable of making detailed measurements of their energy, direction, and type. The data from the complex detector system is still being analysed, but the physicists have seen at least 3 neutrino events, in line with the expectation based on the current beam and detector performance.
This detection therefore marks the beginning of the operational phase of the T2K experiment, a 474-physicist, 13-nation collaboration to measure new properties of the ghostly neutrino. Neutrinos interact only weakly with matter, and thus pass effortlessly through the earth (and mostly through the detectors!). Neutrinos exist in three types, called electron, muon, and tau; linked by particle interactions to their more familiar charged cousins like the electron. Measurements over the last few decades, notably by the Super Kamiokande and KamLAND neutrino experiments in western Japan, have shown that neutrinos possess the strange property of neutrino oscillations, whereby one type of neutrino will turn into another as they propagate through space. Neutrino oscillations, which require neutrinos to have mass and therefore were not allowed in our previous theoretical understanding of particle physics, probe new physical laws and are thus of great interest in the study of the fundamental constituents of matter.
They may even be related to the mystery of why there is more matter than anti-matter in the universe, and thus are the focus of intense study worldwide.
Precision measurements of neutrino oscillations can be made using artificial neutrino beams, as pioneered by the K2K neutrino experiment where neutrinos from the KEK laboratory were detected using the vast Super Kamiokande neutrino detector near Toyama. T2K is a more powerful and sophisticated version of the K2K experiment, with a more intense neutrino beam derived from the newly-built Main Ring synchrotron at the J-PARC accelerator laboratory.
The beam was built by physicists from KEK in cooperation with other Japanese institutions and with assistance from the US, Canadian, UK and French T2K institutes. Prof. Chang Kee Jung of Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, leader of the US T2K project, said "I am somewhat stunned by this seemingly effortless achievement considering the complexity of the machinery, the operation and international nature of the project. This is a result of a strong support from the Japanese government for basic science, which I hope will continue, and hard work and ingenuity of all involved. I am excited about more ground breaking findings from this experiment in the near future."
The beam is aimed once again at Super-Kamiokande, which has been upgraded for this experiment with new electronics and software. Before the neutrinos leave the J-PARC facility their properties are determined by a sophisticated "near" detector, partly based on a huge magnet donated from CERN where it had earlier been used for neutrino experiments (and for the UA1 experiment, which won the Nobel Prize for the discovery of the W and Z bosons which are the basis of neutrino interactions), and it is this detector which caught the first events.
The first neutrino events were detected in a specialize detector, called the INGRID, whose purpose is to determine the neutrino beam's direction and profile. Further tests of the T2K neutrino beam are scheduled for December, and the experiment plans to begin production running in mid-January. Another major milestone should be observed soon after -- the first observation of a neutrino event from the T2K beam in the Super-Kamiokande experiment. Running will continue until the summer, by which time the experiment hopes to have made the most sensitive search yet achieved for a so-far unobserved critical neutrino oscillation mode dominated by oscillations between all three types of neutrinos.
In the coming years this search will be improved even further, with the hope that the 3-mode oscillation will be observed, allowing measurements to begin comparing the oscillations of neutrinos and anti-neutrinos, probing the physics of matter/ anti-matter asymmetry in the neutrino sector.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

June 22, 2010 Millions of years before humans began battling it out over beachfront property, a similar phenomenon was unfolding in a diverse group of island lizards.
Often mistaken for chameleons or geckos, Anolis lizards fight fiercely for resources, responding to rivals by doing push-ups and puffing out their throat pouches. But anoles also compete in ways that shape their bodies over evolutionary time, says a new study in the journal Evolution.
Anolis lizards colonized the Caribbean from South America some 40 million years ago and quickly evolved a wide range of shapes and sizes. "When anoles first arrived in the islands there were no other lizards quite like them, so there was abundant opportunity to diversify," said author Luke Mahler of Harvard University.
Free from rivals in their new island homes, Anolis lizards evolved differences in leg length, body size, and other characteristics as they adapted to different habitats. Today, the islands of Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica and Puerto Rico -- collectively known as the Greater Antilles -- are home to more than 100 Anolis species, ranging from lanky lizards that perch in bushes, to stocky, long-legged lizards that live on tree trunks, to foot-long 'giants' that roam the upper branches of trees.
"Each body type is specialized for using different parts of a tree or bush," said Mahler.
Alongside researchers from the University of Rochester, Harvard University, and the National Evolutionary Synthesis Center, Mahler wanted to understand how and when this wide range of shapes and sizes came to be.
To do that, the team used DNA and body measurements from species living today to reconstruct how they evolved in the past. In addition to measuring the head, limbs, and tail of over a thousand museum specimens representing nearly every Anolis species in the Greater Antilles -- including several Cuban species that were previously inaccessible to North American scientists -- they also used the Anolis family tree to infer what species lived on which islands, and when.
By doing so, they discovered that the widest variety of anole shapes and sizes arose among the evolutionary early-birds. Then as the number of anole species on each island increased, the range of new body types began to fizzle.
Late-comers in lizard evolution underwent finer and finer tinkering as time went on. As species proliferated on each island, their descendants were forced to partition the remaining real estate in increasingly subtle ways, said co-author Liam Revell of the National Evolutionary Synthesis Center in Durham, NC.
"Over time there were fewer distinct niches available on each island," said Revell. "Ancient evolutionary changes in body proportions were large, but more recent evolutionary changes have been more subtle."
The researchers saw the same trend on each island. "The islands are like Petri dishes where species diversification unfolded in similar ways," said Mahler. "The more species there were, the more they put the brakes on body evolution."
The study sheds new light on how biodiversity comes to be. "We're not just looking at species number, we're also looking at how the shape of life changes over time," said Mahler.
The team's findings are published in the journal Evolution.
Richard Glor of the University of Rochester and Jonathan Losos of Harvard University were also authors on this study.
Other social bookmarking and sharing tools:
- D. Luke Mahler, Liam J. Revell, Richard E. Glor, Jonathan B. Losos. Ecological opportunity and the rate of morphological evolution in the diversification of Greater Antillean anoles. Evolution, 2010; DOI: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.01026.x
Note: If no author is given, the source is cited instead.

The word vivisection was first coined in the 1800s to denote the experimental dissection of live animals - or humans. It was created by activists who opposed the practice of experimenting on animals. The Roman physician Celsus claimed that in Alexandria in the 3rd century BCE physicians had performed vivisections on sentenced criminals, but vivisection on humans was generally outlawed. Experimenters frequently used living animals. Most early modern researchers considered this practice acceptable, believing that animals felt no pain. Even those who opposed vivisection in the early modern period did not usually do so out of consideration for the animals, but because they thought that this practice would coarsen the experimenter, or because they were concerned that animals stressed under experimental conditions did not represent the normal state of the body.
Prompted by the rise of experimental physiology and the increasing use of animals, an anti-vivisection movement started in the 1860s. Its driving force, the British journalist Frances Power Cobbe (1822-1904), founded the British Victoria Street Society in 1875, which gave rise to the British government's Cruelty to Animals Act of 1876. This law regulated the use of live animals for experimental purposes.
R A Kopaladze, 'Ivan P. Pavlov's view on vivisection', Integr. Physiol. Behav. Sci., 4 (2000), pp 266-271
C Lansbury, The Old Brown Dog: Women, Workers, and Vivisection in Edwardian England (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1985)
P Mason, The Brown Dog Affair: The Story of a Monument that Divided the Nation (London: Two Stevens, 1997)
N A Rupke, (ed.) Vivisection in Historical Perspective (London: Crooms Helm, 1987)
The science of the functioning of living organisms and their component parts.

by I. Peterson
Unlike an ordinary, incandescent bulb, a laser produces light of a single wavelength. Moreover, the emitted light waves are coherent, meaning that all of the energy peaks and troughs are precisely in step.
Now, a team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has demonstrated experimentally that a cloud consisting of millions of atoms can also be made coherent. Instead of flying about and colliding randomly, the atoms display coordinated behavior, acting as if the entire assemblage were a single entity.
According to quantum mechanics, atoms can behave like waves. Thus, two overlapping clouds made up of atoms in coherent states should produce a zebra-striped interference pattern of dark and light fringes, just like those generated when two beams of ordinary laser light overlap.
By detecting such a pattern, the researchers proved that the clouds' atoms are coherent and constitute an "atom laser," says physicist Wolfgang Ketterle, who heads the MIT group. These matter waves, in principle, can be focused just like light.
Ketterle and his coworkers describe their observations in the Jan. 31 Science.
The demonstration of coherence involving large numbers of atoms is the latest step in a series of studies of a remarkable state of matter called a Bose-Einstein condensate. Chilled to temperatures barely above absolute zero, theory predicted, the atoms would collectively enter the same quantum state and behave like a single unit, or superparticle, with a specific wavelength.
First created in the laboratory in 1995 by Eric A. Cornell and his collaborators at the University of Colorado and the National Institute of Standards and Technology, both in Boulder, Bose-Einstein condensates have been the subject of intense investigation ever since (SN: 7/15/95, p. 36; 5/25/96, p. 327).
At MIT, Ketterle and his colleagues cool sodium atoms to temperatures below 2 microkelvins. The frigid atoms are then confined in a special magnetic trap inside a vacuum chamber.
To determine whether the atoms in the resulting condensate are indeed as coherent as photons in a laser beam, the researchers developed a novel method of extracting a clump of atoms from the trap.
In effect, they manipulate the magnetic states of the atoms to expel an adjustable fraction of the original cloud; under the influence of gravity, the released clump falls. The method can produce a sequence of descending clumps, with each containing 100,000 to several million coherent atoms.
The apparatus acts like a dripping faucet, Ketterle says. He and his colleagues describe the technique in the Jan. 27 Physical Review Letters.
To demonstrate interference, the MIT group created a double magnetic trap so that two pulses of coherent atoms could be released at the same time. As the two clumps fell, they started to spread and overlap. The researchers could then observe interference between the atomic waves of the droplets.
"The signal was almost too good to be true," Ketterle says. "We saw a high-contrast, very regular pattern."
"It's a beautiful result," Cornell remarks. "This work really shows that Bose-Einstein condensation is an atom laser."
From the pattern, the MIT researchers deduced that the condensate of sodium atoms has a wavelength of about 30 micrometers, considerably longer than the 0.04-nanometer wavelength typical of individual atoms at room temperature.
Ketterle and his colleagues are already planning several improvements to their primitive atom laser, including getting more atoms into the emitted pulses and going from pulses to a continuous beam.
Practical use of an atom laser for improving the precision of atomic clocks and for manipulating atoms is still distant, however, Cornell notes.

The Weekly Newsmagazine of Science
Volume 155, Number 19 (May 8, 1999)
|<<Back to Contents|
By J. Raloff
Canadian scientists have identified the likely culprit behind some historic, regional declines in Atlantic salmon. The researchers find that a near-ubiquitous water pollutant can render young, migrating fish unable to survive a life at sea.
Heavy, late-spring spraying of forests with a pesticide laced with nonylphenol during the 1970s and '80s was the clue that led the biologists to unmask that chemical's role in the transitory decline of salmon in East Canada. Though these sprays have ended, concentrations of nonylphenols in forest runoff then were comparable to those in the effluent of some pulp mills, industrial facilities, and sewage-treatment plants today. Downstream of such areas, the scientists argue, salmon and other migratory fish may still be at risk.
Nonylphenols are surfactants used in products from pesticides to dishwashing detergents, cosmetics, plastics, and spermicides. Because waste-treatment plants don't remove nonylphenols well, these chemicals can build up in downstream waters (SN: 1/8/94, p. 24).
When British studies linked ambient nonylphenol pollution to reproductive problems in fish (SN: 2/26/94, p. 142), Wayne L. Fairchild of Canada's Department of Fisheries and Oceans in Moncton, New Brunswick, became concerned. He recalled that an insecticide used on local forests for more than a decade had contained large amounts of nonylphenols. They helped aminocarb, the oily active ingredient in Matacil 1.8D, dissolve in water for easier spraying.
Runoff of the pesticide during rains loaded the spawning and nursery waters of Atlantic salmon with nonylphenols. Moreover, this aerial spraying had tended to coincide with the final stages of smoltificationthe fish's transformation for life at sea.
To probe for effects of forest spraying, Fairchild and his colleagues surveyed more than a decade of river-by-river data on fish. They overlaid these numbers with archival data on local aerial spraying with Matacil 1.8D or either of two nonylphenol-free pesticides. One contained the same active ingredient, aminocarb, as Matacil 1.8D does.
Most of the lowest adult salmon counts between 1973 and 1990 occurred in rivers where smolts would earlier have encountered runoff of Matacil 1.8D, Fairchild's group found. In 9 of 19 cases of Matacil 1.8D spraying for which they had good data, salmon returns were lower than they were within the 5 years earlier and 5 years later, they report in the May Environmental Health Perspectives. No population declines were associated with the other two pesticides.
The researchers have now exposed smolts in the laboratory to various nonylphenol concentrations, including some typical of Canadian rivers during the 1970s. The fish remained healthyuntil they entered salt water, at which point they exhibited a failure-to-thrive syndrome.
"They looked like they were starving," Fairchild told Science News. Within 2 months, he notes, 20 to 30 percent died. Untreated smolts adjusted normally to salt water and fattened up.
Steffen S. Madsen, a fish ecophysiologist at Odense University in Denmark, is not surprised, based on his own experiments.
To move from fresh water to the sea, a fish must undergo major hormonal changes that adapt it for pumping out excess salt. A female preparing to spawn in fresh water must undergo the opposite change. Since estrogen triggers her adaptation, Madsen and a colleague decided to test how smolts would respond to estrogen or nonylphenol, an estrogen mimic.
In the lab, they periodically injected salmon smolts with estrogen or nonylphenol over 30 days, and at various points placed them in seawater for 24 hours. Salt in the fish's blood skyrocketed during the day-long trials, unlike salt in untreated smolts. "Our preliminary evidence indicates that natural and environ- mental estrogens screw up the pituitary," Madsen says. The gland responds by making prolactin, a hormone that drives freshwater adaptation.
Judging by Fairchild's data, Madsen now suspects that any fish that migrates between fresh and salt water may be similarly vulnerable to high concentrations of pollutants that mimic estrogen.
From Science News, Vol. 155, No. 19, May 8, 1999, p. 293. Copyright © 1999, Science Service.
Copyright © 1999 Science Service

Show kids that science and fun go hand in hand
The loveable characters from PBS’ award-winning The Magic School Bus™ will help children explore the scientific properties of polymers. Create goop, melt snow, extract polymers from milk, make snow erupt, and much more!
Self-contained, bus-shaped kit includes 20 experiment cards, a data notebook, science components, and 10 containers of polymers, including super balls, rainbow beads, snow, and gel crystals.
Warning! This set contains chemicals that may be harmful if misused.
Read cautions on individual containers carefully. Not to be used by children except under adult supervision.
Recommended for ages 5+.

Advanced Science, Simple Operation
Demonstrate the movement of invisible charged particles with this unique device. Designed in conjunction with the Contemporary Physics Education Project (CPEP), the Detector uses the analogy of magnetics. Students watch and plot the resulting paths of collisions between charged and neutral particles.
The two-layered detector comes with magnetic marbles, ordinary marbles, iron filings, and an instruction sheet. Size: 21 x 28cm.

Scientists collect samples of the natural world to try to answer questions about our environment.
So many questions and so much we still don't know. The samples collected each represent a particular time and place in our environment. Think about your home. If a scientist had collected the plants and insects from your land 50 years ago, would they be the same or different than ones you would find today?
The collected samples are the basic tool for the scientist's research and discovery. A museum specimen is made from the collected sample. We prepare them for study and add them to the research collections. Then they are ready to be used by scientists, not only this year, but for years, even generations to come.
Teachers and Museum Docents use specimens in our collections to bring the facts and concepts of science to life.
Anyway, you get the idea. Specimens and objects in the Museum's Nature to You Loan Program are particularly helpful for the kindergarten through high school ages. The Research Collections are used by college professors to help their students with the more advanced concepts.
Have you ever used a field guide to identify that bird you saw in your backyard? Or that little squirrel-like mammal that just scooted off through the rocks? Or that flower you saw in the park?
Artists rely heavily on collections of specimens when they create the illustrations for field guides. They need to see details to make accurate paintings. Different coloration and shapes help you see the differences between the chipmunk and the ground squirrel -- or the coyote and the neighbor's scrawny dog.
Have you seen dioramas at a museum? Paintings in the background of exhibits are based on specimens.
You've used specimens if you have ...
Specimens are a fantastic tool--a resource that helps you discover the secrets of the world around you.
Specimens form the core of a museum's philosophy. They are critical for research, for teaching, for our enjoyment of nature through art. Specimens at the San Diego Natural History Museum support our mission to understand the natural world of Southern California and the Baja California peninsula.
We want you to enjoy and benefit from the specimens we collect--but we also want your grandchildren to have those same experiences with specimens. For your grandchildren to be able to learn from the specimens, we need to prevent damage to the specimens.

Symptoms of Spondylolysis and Spondylolisthesis
Spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis may not cause any obvious symptoms for some children. In others, spondylolysis can cause pain that spreads across the lower back. Pain may be worse when children arch their backs.
If the slipping is severe for children with spondylolisthesis, it can stretch the nerves in the lower part of the back. This can lead to:
- Pain that goes down one or both legs
- A numb feeling in one or both feet
- Weakness in your child’s legs
- Trouble controlling bladder or bowel movements
Spondylolysis and Spondylolisthesis Diagnosis
Doctors look first for signs of cracks in the bones of your child's back. These cracks are called stress fractures. We look for stress fractures first because spine slippage, though rare in children, usually happens to those who have the fractures first.
The doctor will ask your child if the pain is worse when they arch their back. This is a common sign of stress fractures. Most often, these fractures are in the lower part of the backbone.
Next, we most likely will take X-rays of your child’s backbone. This helps doctors make sure your child has a stress fracture. If we cannot see the crack clearly on the X-ray, we may ask to do a bone scan.
If we find a crack in the bone, we will probably take a three-dimensional X-ray called a CT (computed tomography) scan. This will give us an even better look at the fracture and help you and your child’s doctor decide on treatment.

Densho: The Japanese American Legacy Project Programs
Densho Digital Archive
Free searchable database containing over 700 transcribed and indexed video oral histories and 10,700 photos and documents that trace Japanese American history from immigration to wartime detention to civil rights-era redress. Users include teachers, students, historical preservationists, journalists, legal scholars, documentary makers, and the general public.
Densho trains hundreds of classroom teachers every year on how to teach with primary sources about the World War II incarceration of Japanese Americans.
Densho Online Encyclopedia
The Densho Encyclopedia is a free and publicly accessible website that provides concise, accurate, and balanced information on many aspects of the Japanese American story during World War II. It is designed and written for a non-specialist audience that includes high school and college students and instructors, multiple generations of Nikkei community members, confinement sites preservation groups, amateur and professional historians, librarians, journalists, documentarians, and the general public. The Encyclopedia is thoroughly cross indexed and articles are linked to relevant primary and secondary materials from the Densho archive and from other websites that include still and moving images, documents, databases, and oral history interview excerpts as well as standard bibliographical sources.
Recent Successes and Current Challenges
Over the last two years, Densho has added over 200 new oral histories to its online archive, launched a new 350 article online encyclopedia, and trained over 500 classroom teachers. Densho's work in historic preservation and education has been recognized by awards from NPower, the Washington State Historical Society, the Japanese American Citizens League, Humanities Washington, the American Library Association, Microsoft Technology for Good, and the Microsoft Alumni Foundation
A current need of Densho is to support the marketing of Densho's resources to a nationwide audience of teachers, librarians, historians, and creators of educational media.

Austrian architect and urbanist
Wagner studied architecture at the School of Architecture at Vienna Academy, Austria, where he later became a teacher. Among his students were the renowned Art Nouveau architects Josef Maria Olbrich and Josef Hoffmann.
From 1895 he was influenced by new art styles, more suited to the needs of modern way of life and developed his theories on architecture, relating to function, material and construction, in the book "Modern Architecture" (1895). In 1898, he built his first Art Nouveau building, the Majolica House in Vienna, a functional structure with the facade covered in multicolored majolica tiles. He also designed in 1894, the Vienna metropolitan railway system.
Otto Wagner was one of the founding members of the Vienna Secession, with fellow artists Klimt, Hoffmann and Olbrich, in 1899. He was one of the most influential artists of the turn of the century : architect, urnbanist, applied artist and theoretician, his writings laid the groundwork for Modernism in architecture. In his architectural works, he was receptive to the use of modern methods of building (steel frame construction) and new materials (thin marble slabs for the façades).
Majolica House on the Wienzeile, Vienna, Austria (1898-1899);
Stadtbahn (metropolitan railway system), Vienna (1894-1902);
Post Office Savings Bank (Die Österreichische Postsparkasse) Building, Vienna (1894-1902).

Gaia theory is a class of scientific models of the geo-biosphere in which life as a whole fosters and maintains suitable conditions for itself by helping to create an environment on Earth suitable for its continuity. The first such theory was created by the atmospheric scientist and chemist, Sir James Lovelock, who developed his hypotheses in the 1960s before formally publishing the concept, first in the New Scientist (February 13, 1975) and then in the 1979 book "Quest for Gaia". He hypothesized that the living matter of the planet functioned like a single organism and named this self-regulating living system after the Greek goddess, Gaia, using a suggestion of novelist William Golding.
Gaia "theories" have non-technical predecessors in the ideas of several cultures. Today, "Gaia theory" is sometimes used among non-scientists to refer to hypotheses of a self-regulating Earth that are non-technical but take inspiration from scientific models. Among some scientists, "Gaia" carries connotations of lack of scientific rigor, quasi-mystical thinking about the planet arth, and therefore Lovelock's hypothesis was received initially with much antagonism by much of the scientific community. No controversy exists, however, that life and the physical environment significantly influence one another.
Gaia theory today is a spectrum of hypotheses, ranging from the undeniable (Weak Gaia) to the radical (Strong Gaia).
At one end of this spectrum is the undeniable statement that the organisms on the Earth have radically altered its composition. A stronger position is that the Earth's biosphere effectively acts as if it is a self-organizing system, which works in such a way as to keep its systems in some kind of meta-equilibrium that is broadly conducive to life. The history of evolution, ecology and climate show that the exact characteristics of this equilibrium intermittently have undergone rapid changes, which are believed to have caused extinctions and felled civilisations.
Biologists and earth scientists usually view the factors that stabilize the characteristics of a period as an undirected emergent property or entelechy of the system; as each individual species pursues its own self-interest, for example, their combined actions tend to have counterbalancing effects on environmental change. Opponents of this view sometimes point to examples of life's actions that have resulted in dramatic change rather than stable equilibrium, such as the conversion of the Earth's atmosphere from a reducing environment to an oxygen-rich one. However, proponents will point out that those atmospheric composition changes created an environment even more suitable to life.
Some go a step further and hypothesize that all lifeforms are part of a single living planetary being called Gaia. In this view, the atmosphere, the seas and the terrestrial crust would be results of interventions carried out by Gaia through the coevolving diversity of living organisms. While it is arguable that the Earth as a unit does not match the generally accepted biological criteria for life itself (Gaia has not yet reproduced, for instance), many scientists would be comfortable characterising the earth as a single "system".
The most extreme form of Gaia theory is that the entire Earth is a single unified organism; in this view the Earth's biosphere is consciously manipulating the climate in order to make conditions more conducive to life. Scientists contend that there is no evidence at all to support this last point of view, and it has come about because many people do not understand the concept of homeostasis. Many non-scientists instinctively see homeostasis as an activity that requires conscious control, although this is not so.
Much more speculative versions of Gaia theory, including all versions in which it is held that the Earth is actually conscious or part of some universe-wide evolution, are currently held to be outside the bounds of science.
This article is licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License. It uses material from the Wikipedia article "Gaia".

The American Revolutionary War began in 1775 and ended in 1783. The British ruled the American colonists and they had become increasingly rebellious. General Gage had ordered 700 British soldiers to Concord to destroy a weapon's depot belonging to the colonists. On the way, they are met by some rebellious colonists and the British fire, killing eight Americans and wounding ten. This was known as ‘the shot heard round the world' and the war was on. The first major battle occurred on June 17, 1775 at Boston, Massachusetts. It was known as the Battle of Bunker Hill. The British are used to marching proudly out before taking aim and firing. The Americans have been ordered not to fire until they can see the whites of their eyes. They are dug in along the high ground of Breed's Hill. As the British close in, the Americans begin firing halting the advance. The British regroup and attack again. The same thing happens. By the third attack the Americans are out of ammunition and have to resort to stones and bayonets. Although the British take the hill, they've lost half their force with over a thousand casualties; the Americans have lost four hundred. On January 9, 1776, Thomas Paine's pamphlet, ‘Common Sense' criticizes King George III and encourages independence from Britain. It becomes a bestseller. By May, America has support from France and promises of support from Spain. After many battles, Congress formally endorses the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776. But the war isn't over yet. On July 14, 1777, Congress mandates an American flag consisting of thirteen stars and thirteen stripes to represent the thirteen colonies.
The first major American victory in the Revolutionary war occurs on October 7, 1777 at the Battle of Saratoga. There are six hundred British casualties to one hundred fifty American. On November 15, 1777, Congress adopts the Articles of Confederation giving Congress the sole authority of the new government. In February, France officially recognizes the United States. On March 16, 1778, a Peace Commission from Britain is sent to negotiate with the Americans. They offer to meet all demands, except independence. Congress rejects their offer. On July 10, 1778, France declares war against Britain. By now the British have instigated attacks on Americans by the native Indians. On May 12, 1780, the Americans suffered a major defeat as Charleston, South Carolina was captured by the British. On October 17, 1781, the British at Yorktown send out a flag of truce. On January 1, 1782, the British begin leaving America. On February 27, 1782, the House of Commons in England votes against further war with America. On August 27, 1872, the last battle is waged in South Carolina. On February 4, 1783, England officially declares an end to hostilities in America. On April 11, 1783, Congress officially declares an end to the Revolutionary war.

The Wild West
How the West Was Won
Dusty road shoot outs, roaming buffalo, bar brawls, gold, tragedy and genocide, damsels in distress, and cowboys riding off into the sunset—the taming of the Western frontier is one of the most colorful and fascinating periods of American history. In this beautifully illustrated and comprehensive book, Bruce Wexler brings the ruggedness of the old American West to life. The Wild West separates fact from the fiction, exposing the myths of the old West, and assesses its cultural impact on the indigenous people, American life, and the American dream—both past and present.

What is SMART ?SMART (Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of Relief and Transitions) is an inter-agency initiative launched in 2002 by a network of organizations and humanitarian practitioners.
SMART Methodology is an improved survey method for the assessment of severity of a humanitarian crisis based on the two most vital public health indicators:
- Nutritional status of children under-five.
- Mortality rate of the population.
SMART NewsUPCOMING SMART TRAINING: An inter-agency training will take place in Madrid on June 17th-21st, 2013, intended for European-based headquarter staff involved in nutrition and mortality surveys. Please make sure you have filled out the pre-questionnaire no later than Friday, May 24th, 2013: http://www.surveymonkey.com/s/SMART_MADRID_2013
Preparing survey teams in SMART
The SMART standardized survey methodology incorporates elements of nutrition, mortality, and food security for emergencies or surveillance purposes. It was developed to be used with the user-friendly ENA software.
The SMART manual provides agencies & field workers with basic tools to collect data necessary for planning direct interventions in emergency settings, as well as for surveillance.
Standardized Training Package (STP)
The STP harmonizes the procedures and tools used throughout the survey process and is broken down into 9 modules.
Emergency Nutrition Assessment (ENA) Software
ENA software is the user-friendly analytical program recommended by SMART. It saves time and effort by simplifying both survey planning and data collection via integrated calculators.

Animals. Can’t live with ‘em, can’t live without eating ‘em. (Just kidding, vegans!)
Whether or not you do eat them, you certainly don’t want to waste any of the precious meat — and that’s what normally happens when a machine, not a human, tries to butcher an animal. After all, each animal is a different size and shape.
Enter Automated Lamb Boning. Developed by Scott Technology LTD, a New Zealand-based lamb exporter, this process uses X-ray technology to measure the inner dimensions of a lamb carcass to make cuts accurate and reduce waste.
Using the X-ray of each carcass, the 100% automated processing plant can adjust its robotic arms, claws, grippers, torso impalers and conveyor belts to make the most accurate cuts.
Watch the video (not for the squeamish) to see how efficiently it produces crown racks, chops and more.
Related on SmartPlanet:
- Video: Machine scoops up, deposits ketchup — in same shape
- Self-sculpting sand assembles itself into shapes
- Small, speedy robots zip, roll and swarm through the air
- Lockheed Martin debuts maple seed-inspired drone
- Video: Scientists create micro-robots that form assembly lines
via: Popular Science

Smoke Detectors, Carbon Monoxide Detectors, Gas Detectors
SMOKE DETECTOR INFORMATION:
Most people are aware of the danger of fire but are unaware of the fatality of smoke. More people die from breathing smoke than by burns. In fact, deaths from smoke inhalation outnumber deaths by burning by 2:1. In a hostile fire, smoke and deadly gases tend to spread farther and faster than heat from flames. Moreover, when people are asleep, deadly fumes can send them deeper into unconsciousness.
Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors are a powerful and effective fire safety technology. They are the first lines of defense against smoke and fire. They may awaken those who would otherwise have been overcome by smoke and toxic gases in their sleep. And most importantly, they provide an early warning alerting individuals of a fire, allowing them precious time to escape.
According to the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), 75 to 80% of all deaths by fire happen in the home. More than half of these deaths occurred in buildings without smoke detectors. By installing a smoke detector, individuals can reduce the risk of dying by almost 50%.
Ionization smoke detectors monitor 'ions,' or electrically charged particles in the air. Air molecules in a sample chamber of ionization smoke detectors, are 'ionized' by a radioactive source. This allows a small electrical current flow. Smoke particles entering the sensing chamber change the electrical balance of the air. The greater the amount of smoke, the higher the electrical imbalance. When combustion particles enter the smoke detector, they obstruct the flow of the current. An alarm is pre-programmed to sound when the current gets too low.
Ionization smoke detectors respond first to fast flaming fires. A flaming fire devours combustibles extremely fast, spreads rapidly and generates considerable heat with little smoke.
Ionization alarms are best suited for rooms, which contain highly combustible material. These types of material include:
1. Cooking fat/grease 2. Flammable liquids 3. Newspaper 4. Paint 5. Cleaning solutions
Smoke alarms with ionization technology are the most popular types sold in the United States.
The NFPA recommends smoke alarms be installed in EVERY room and area of your home or bulding for complete protection. For maximum protection, install at least one ionization and one photoelectronic smoke alarm on each level of your home.
All smoke alarms should be replaced after 10 years of operation. Ten years is a smoke alarm's useful lifetime and for continued, reliable safety and protection, smoke alarms need to be replaced.
Consumer's should consult their owner's manual for specific instructions when locating a smoke alarm. The following are some general guidelines:
Because smoke rises, smoke alarms should be installed on the ceiling or on walls at least 4 to 6 inches below the ceiling.
Smoke alarms should not be located less than 4 to 6 inches from where the wall and ceiling meet on either surface; this space is dead air that receives little circulation.
Smoke alarms should not be mounted in front of an air supply, return duct, near ceiling fans, peaks of A-frame ceilings, dusty areas, locations outside the 40 degree Farenheit to 100 degree Farenheit temperature range, in humid areas or near fluorescent lighting.
If you hear the smoke alarm, roll to the floor and crawl to the door. Stay low where the air is cleaner and cooler. Touch the door. If the door feels cool, open it just a crack and check for smoke. If there is no smoke, leave by your planned escape route. Crawl and keep your head down. If the door feels hot, do not open it. Do no panic. Escape out the window or use an alternate exit.
If you can't leave your room, seal the cracks around the doors and vents as best you can. Use a wet towel or clothing if possible. Open a window at both the top and bottom. Stay low and breathe fresh air. Shout for help and signal your location by waving a bright cloth, towel or sheet out of a window.
If you live in a high rise building, never use the elevator to escape fire. If the fire blocks your exit, close your apartment door and cover all cracks where smoke could enter. Telephone the fire department, even if fire fighters are aleready at the scene, and tell them where you are. Shout for help and signal your location by waving a bright cloth, towel or sheet out of a window.
If your clothes catch on fire, "Stop, Drop and Roll" to put out the flames. Do not run-running will only increase the flames.
Photoelectronic alarms contain a light emitting diode (LED) which is adjusted to direct a narrow infrared light across the unit's detection chamber. When smoke particles enter this chamber they interfere with the beam and scatter the light. A strategically placed photodiode monitors the amount of light scattered within the chamber. When a pre-set level of light strikes the photodiode, the alarm is activated.
Photoelectronic smoke alarms respond first to slow smoldering fires. A smoldering fire generates large amounts of thick, black smoke with little heat and may smolder for hours before bursting into flames.
Photoelectronic models are best suited for living rooms, bedrooms and kitchens. This is because these rooms often contain large pieces of furniture, such as sofas, chairs, mattresses, counter tops, etc. which will burn slowly and create more smoldering smoke than flames. Photoelectronic smoke alarms are also less prone to nuisance alarms in the kitchen area than ionization smoke alarms.
The use of both ionization and photoelectronic smoke alarms will provide a home with maximum protection and an ample warning in the event of a fire.
Families should get together and draw a floor plan of their home. They should show two ways out of every room. The first way should be out a door and the second way could be through a window. If it is a second or third story window, they might consider purchasing a safety ladder. They should choose a meeting place for all family members outside the home and mark it on the plan. A good meeting place would be a driveway, tree or a neighbor's home.
Families should practice the escape plan to make sure everyone understands the planned routes. Involve every member of the family. Start with everyone in their beds with the doors closed. Have one person sound the smoke alarm. Have each person touch his or her door. (Tip: sleep with bedroom doors closed. A closed door will help show the spread of fire, smoke and heat). Practice low escape routes-one for a cool door and one for a hot door. Meet outdoors at the assigned meeting place. Designate one person to call the fire department. Make sure everyone knows the fire department or local emergency telephone number.
Consumers should be advised of the following features when choosing a smoke alarm to best suit their needs:
Smoke detectors with an alarm silencer feature will silence an alarming unit for several minutes, giving the air time to clear. These models are idal near kitchen and cooking areas where most nuisance alarms occur. Note: consumers should always determine the reason for the unit sounding before quickly dismissing it as a nuisance alarm and pressing the alarm silencer feature to silence the alarm.
Long Life Smoke Detectors
The NFPA reports that 1/3 of all smoke detectors installed in homes are not operating because of dead or missing batteries. This is an all too common occurrence in smoke detectors that leaves families and homes vulnerable.
Long life smoke detectors utilize lithium batteries that provide up to 10 years of continuous protection. Lithium batteries eliminate the need and expense of semi-annual battery replacement. When long life smoke detectors near the end of their tenth year in operation, they will sound a low battery signal to remind consumers to replace the entire unit.
Note: it is recommended that smoke detectors be replaced every 10 years and be tested regularly.
Some smoke detectors have a built-in emergency light that will turn on when the unit goes into alarm. The emergency light will illuminate an escape route in case of a power failure. These units are best utilized when installed by stairs and in hallways.
Hardwire smoke detectors are connected to a home's AC power supply and should be intalled by a licensed electrician according to the local electrical code. AC power means you never have to replace a battery to protect your home and family.
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR INFORMATION:
Carbon monoxide poisoning is often confused with the flu. It is important that you discuss with all family members the symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning. Different carbon monoxide concentrations and exposure times cause different symptoms. Remember, carbon monoxide detectors are your first defense against carbon monoxide poisoning.
EXTREME EXPOSURE: Unconsciousness, convulsions, cardiorespiratory failure, and death
MEDIUM EXPOSURE: Severe throbbing headache, drowsiness, confusion, vomitting, and fast heart rate
MILD EXPOSURE: Slight headache, nausea, fatigue (often described as 'flu-like' symptoms)
For most people, mild symptoms generally will be felt after several hours of exposure of 100 ppm's of carbon monoxide.
Many reported cases of carbon monoxide poisoning indicate that while victims are aware they are not well, they become so disoriented that they are unable to save themselves by either exiting the building or calling for assistance. Also, due to small size, young children and household pets may be the first affected.
If left unchecked, a child's exposure to carbon monoxide can lead to neurological disorders, memory loss, personality changes and mild to severe forms of brain damage.
If a child complains or shows signs of headaches, dizziness, fatigue or nausea or diarrhea, he or she could have carbon monoxide poisoning. Be especially aware of symptoms that disappear when the child is out of the house and reappear upon return, or symptoms that affect the entire household at once.
Since the symptoms closely mimic viral conditions such as the flu, without the fever, carbon monoxide poisoning is often treated improperly, if at all.
A physician can perform a simple blood test (called a carboxyhemoglobin test) to determine the level of carbon monoxide in the bloodstream. If elevated levels of carbon monoxide are present, hyperbaric (high-pressure) oxygen treatment may be used to rid the body of carbon monoxide. A physician will make this determination and administer treatment if necessary.
Children with carbon monoxide poisoning have mistakenly been treated for indigestion.
The following are considerations consumers should be advised to take when choosing a carbon monoxide detector that will be sure to meet their needs.
1. Consumers should consider ease of installation, the location of installation and the power source of an alarm when choosing a plug-in, battery powered or hardwire model.
Plug-in units are designed to directly plug into a standard 120-volt electrical outlet for simple installation. This location provides easy access for both testing and resetting the detector. In addition, the location provides both a visual and audible difference from a ceiling mounted smoke alarm, which may help to eliminate confusion during an emergency alarm condition. A plug-in unit also requires no additional costs for annual battery replacement.
Battery powered units can be easily mounted to a wall or ceiling if the consumer wishes to keep electrical outlets free, if they wish to keep the unit relatively out of sight, or if they would like to keep the alarm away from the reach of children. Some battery-powered units are portable alarms that work anywhere--no installation required. These units may be mounted to a wall, left on a tabletop or carried while traveling. Battery powered units require battery replacement every year, similar to smoke alarms. These units will have a low battery-warning signal to indicate when the batteries need repacing.
Hardwire units are powered by wiring the unit directly into a household's AC power supply at a junction box. A licensed electrician according to the local electrical code should install them. The unit can be permanently installed to prevent tampering.
2. Consumers should choose a carbon monoxide detector with the features (e.g. low level warning, battery back up, digital display, etc.) that meet their needs.
Low Level Warning-some carbon monoxide alarms sound a warning (e.g. 3 short beeps) when a low level of carbon monoxide has been detected. Low levels of carbon monoxide can be hazardous over a long period of time. Low level warnings flag potential carbon monoxide problems and allow consumers time to respond to them before an emergency situation arises.
Battery Backup-some plug-in carbon monoxide alarm models have a back-up power source that allows the unit to function in the event of a main line power failure. During a power outage, people are likely to use alternate sources of power, light and heat (e.g. kerosene heaters, gas-powered portable generators and fireplaces) which may be out of tune and may produce deadly carbon monoxide gas.
Digital Display-some carbon monoxide alarms have a digital display that shows the levels of carbon monoxide in the air in parts per million (ppm). For some people, this added feature provides at-a-glance peace of mind.
3. Consumers should choose an alarm that has been accuracy tested.
American Sensors(TM), guarantees each of its alarms to be Triple Accuracy Tested(TM).
American Sensors'(TM) triple Accuracy Testing process exposes every alarm to three separate tests during manufacturing. This testing process includes twice exposing the alarm to carbon monoxide to precisely calibrate each unit. One test is at high levels and the second is at lower levels of carbon monoxide. In the third step, every alarm is tested to protect against nuisance alarms.
This stringent method of testing and quality control helps ensure that every American Sensors(TM) carbon monoxide alarm will provide years of reliable, accurate protection for your family and home.
4. Consumers should compare alarm warranties and note hidden operating costs.
Consumers should select an alarm that offers a comprehensive warranty. The alarm's warranty should include its sensor. Consumers should be advised that some CO alarms require the purchase of an expensive replacement sensor and/or battery pack as an ongoing expense. American Sensors(TM) alarms do not require replacement sensors and carry a 5 year warranty.
5. Check that the product is Listed by Underwriters Laboratories Inc. UL 2034 and/or Underwriters' Laboratories of Canada.
Consumers should avoid any brand that does not bear the mark of Underwriters Laboratories Inc. and/or Underwriters' Laboratories of Canada.
All American Sensors(TM) carbon monoxide alarms meets and/or exceeds the latest stringent standards of Underwriters Laboratories Inc. and/or Underwriters' Laboratories of Canada.
Carbon monoxide is generated through incomplete combustion of fuel such as natural gas, propane, heating oil, kerosene, coal, and charcoal, gasoline or wood.
This incomplete combustion can occur in a variety of home appliances. The major cause of high levels of carbon monoxide in the home is faulty ventilation of funaces, hot water heaters, fireplaces, cooking stoves, grills and kerosene heaters.
Other common sources are car exhausts, and gas or diesel powered portable machines.
Faulty or improper ventilation of natural gas and fuel oil furnaces during the cold winter months accouts for most carbon monoxide poisoning cases.
Correct operation of any fuel burning equipment requires two key conditions. There must be:
* An adequate supply of air for complete combustion.
* Proper ventilation of fuel burning appliances through the chimney, vents or duct to the outside.
Install carbon monoxide alarms as a first line of defense against poisoning. The US Consumer Product Safety Commission recommends installing at least one carbon monoxide alarm with an audible alarm near the sleeping areas in every home. Install additional alarms on every level and in every bedroom to provide extra protection.
Carbon monoxide poisoning can happen anywhere and at any time in your home. However, most carbon monoxide poisoning cases occur while people are sleeping. Therefore, for the best protection, a carbon monoxide alarm should be installed in the sleeping area.
Approximately 250 people in the US died last year from the 'silent killer'-carbon monoxide. The safety experts at Underwriter's Laboratories Inc. (UL) recommend that consumers follow these steps to help prevent carbon monoxide poisoning.
1. Have a qualified technician inspect fuel-burning appliances at least once a year. Fuel-burning appliances such as furnaces, how water heaters and stoves require yearly maintenance. Over time, components can become damaged or deteriorate. A qualified technician can identify and repair problems with your fuel-burning appliances. Carbon monoxide detectors can detect a carbon monoxide condition in your home.
2. Be alert to the danger signs that signal carbon monoxide problems, e.g., streaks of carbon or soot around the service door of your fuel burning appliances; the absence of a draft in your chimney; excessive rusting on flue pipes or appliance jackets; moisture collecting on the windows and walls of furnace rooms; fallen soot from the fireplace; small amounts of water leaking from the base of the chimney, vent or flue pipe; damaged or discolored bricks at the top of your chimney and rust on the portion of the vent pipe visible from outside your home.
3. Be aware that carbon monoxide poisoning may be the cause of flu-like symptoms such as headaches, tightness of chest, dizziness, fatigue, confussion and breathing difficulties. Because carbon monoxide poisoning often causes a victim's blood pressure to rise, the victim's skin may take on a ink or red cast.
4. Install a UL/ULC Listed carbon monoxide detector outside sleeping areas. A UL/ULC Listed carbon monoxide alarm will sound an alarm before dangerous levels of carbon monoxide accumulate.
Carbon monoxide poisoning can happen to anyone, anytime, almost anywhere. While anyone is susceptible, experts agree that unborn babies, small children, senior citizens and people with heart or respiratory problems are especially vulnerable to carbon monoxide and are at the greatest risk for death or serious injuries. Itís time to install your carbon monoxide detector.
Infants and children are especially vulnerable to carbon monoxide due to their high metabolic rates. Because children use more oxygen faster than adults do, deadly carbon monoxide gas accumulates in their bodies faster and can interfere with oxygen supply to vital organs such as the brain and the heart. Unborn babies have an even higher risk of carbon monoxide poisoning and carbon monoxide poisoning in pregnant women has been linked to birth defects. This is another reason to install a carbon monoxide detector.
Hundreds of people die each year, and thousands more require medical treatment, because of carbon monoxide poisoning in their home. Now, with recent technological breakthroughs, you can avoid becoming one of these statistics simply by installing a carbon monoxide detector in your home.
Consumers should consult their owner's maunal for a carbon monoxide detector procedure. However, the following is a general procedure:
If a carbon monoxide detector sounds a low level warning or hazard level alarm, consumers should push the test/reset button to silence it.
If no one in the household has any carbon monoxide symptoms (headache, dizziness, nausea, and fatigue) consumers should be advised to open the doors and windows to air out their house. They should turn off any gas, oil or other fuel powered appliances including the furnace and call a qualified technician or thier local utility company to inspect and repair their home before restarting the furnace and all fuel-burning appliances.
If anyone in the household does have signs of carbon monoxide poisoning, consumers should leave their home immediately and call their local emergency service or 911 for help. They should do a head count to check that all persons are accounted for once outside in the fresh air. They should not re-enter their home until it has been aired out and the problem corrected by a qualified technician or utility company.
Most carbon monoxide detectors sold at retail are for use in single residential living units only. They should only be used inside a single family home or apartment. They cannot be used in RV's or boats.
Carbon monoxide detectors should not be installed in the following locations:
1. Kitchens or within 5 feet of any cooking appliance where grease, smoke, and other decomposed compounds from cooking could build up on the surface of the carbon monoxide sensor and cause the alarm to malfunction.
2. Bathrooms or the other rooms where long-term exposure to steam or high levels of water vapor could permanently damage the carbon monoxide sensor.
3. Very cold (below 40 degrees Fahrenheit) or very hot (above 100 degrees Fahrenheit) rooms. The alarm will not work properly under these conditions.
4. Do not place in a close proximity to an automobile exhaust pipe, as this will damage the sensor.
***PLACE ONE CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR ON EVERY LEVEL OF YOUR HOME FOR MAXIMUM PROTECTION***
Read the manufacturer's instructions carefully before installing a carbon monoxide alarm. Do not place the alarm within five feet of household chemicals. If your alarm is wired directly into your home's electrical system, you should test it monthly. If your unit operates off a battery, test the alarm weekly and replace the battery at least once a year.
Avoid placing your alarm directly on top of or directly across from fuel-burning appliances. These appliances will emit some carbon monoxide when initially turned-on. Never use charcoal grills inside a home, tent, camper or unventilated garage. Don't leave vehichles running in an enclosed garage, even to 'warm up' your car on a cold morning.
Know how to respond to a carbon monoxide detector. If your alarm sounds, immediately open windows and doors for ventilation. if anyone in the home is experiencing symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning-headache, dizziness or other flu-like symptoms, immediately evacuate the house and call the fire department. Don't go back into the house until a fire fighter tells you it is okay to do so. If no one is experiencing these symptoms, continue to ventilate, turn off fuel-burning appliances and call a qualified technician to inspect your heating system and appliances as soon as possible. Because you have provided ventilation, the carbon monoxide buildup may have dissipated by the time help responds and your problem may appear to be temporarily solved. Do not operate any fuel-burning appliances until you have clearly identified the source of the problem. A carbon monoxide alarm indicates elevated levels of carbon monoxide in the home. NEVER IGNORE THE ALARM.
The safety experts urge consumers to recognize the danger signs of carbon monoxide before any harm can come to them or their families.

Here is how it was done in 1810...By a mechanical wiz, not a beginner - now show us how you'd do it with a few motors and a controller
And I don't think that you'd put that old mechanical doll in the "simple" category?
Simple it was not. Just imagine what it took to program it by cutting brass cams for each degree of freedom... Amazing is what I would call it.
Now, back to the original problem - is this robot supposed to write random phrases or just a couple pre-programed things?
One of the tough parts would be the math - first, mathematically describing the path for the tip of the arm and then sorting out all of the joint angles as a function of time to get it to trace the desired path.
One way around the math would be to build the arm with position sensors and then just move the arm by hand along the desired paths and record the angles. Then, the recorded values could be used as the target positions for your arm controller (a simple PI controller is likely to be adequate if you didn't try to move the arm too fast). Create tables of time / position pairs to describe the paths for the arm.
If the arm was built with servos - that makes it more difficult to record the "training" movements because all the feedback is inside the servo's themselves. So, you would have to open up the servos and run wires back from the potentiometers to your micro-controller to record the servo positions as you train it. (And translate from the voltage from the pot to the pulsewidth sent to the servo to get that position - another training exercise where you command various pulsewidths and record the potentiometer output.)
Getting a robot to generate nice cursive writing was a challenge in 1810, and can be a challenge today!

Sign up to save your quiz points
or they’ll be gone
Prepare Your Classroom
to Learn with a Tablet.
Learning the musical alphabet notation and where each note is on the piano keyboard in relation to the two and three black keys.
Learning the musical alphabet A through G and finding them on the piano.
for Sophia online college credit courses.

Federal and state laws emphasize the importance of parents/guardians as key decision makers in the educational process. Child Study Team personnel share many common skills such as child advocacy, understanding of school functioning, knowledge and implementation of special education law, case management, transition planning, inservice training, research, and community collaboration. However, each discipline approaches the intervention and eligibility process from a different perspective based on the training and skills of each profession.
School Psychologists are specialists with training and expertise in psychology as it is applied to education. They use their training and skills to collaborate with parents/guardians, educators, and other professionals to ensure that every child learns in a safe and supportive environment. School Psychologists use their understanding of school organization and effective learning to help students realize their academic and social potentials. They tailor their services to the particular needs of each child and each situation. School Psychologists are trained to assess and counsel students with behavioral, emotional, and educational concerns through consultation, prevention, intervention, crisis management, evaluation, and program development. A psychological assessment shall be the responsibility of a School Psychologist employed by the district Board of Education. The psychological assessment should include standardized and functional appraisals of a student’s current cognitive, intellectual, adaptive, social, emotional and behavioral status in the context of his/her environments. The assessment should include consultation with parents, educators, and relevant professionals; a student interview; and observation of the student in other than a testing situation.
School Social Workers provide unique services to students and their families, helping the students attain maximum benefits from their educational programs. The School Social Worker's knowledge of social, emotional, cultural and economic differences among children and families enable them to be the link between school, family and community. As a member of the educational team, School Social Workers promote and support students' academic and social/emotional well-being. Through sound school social work practice, the School Social Worker is able to enhance the full educational and individual potential of all students and eliminate barriers to learning by being pro-active within the academic community and providing early intervention, prevention, consultation, counseling, crisis management, and support services. A social assessment shall be the responsibility of a school social worker employed by the district board of education. The social assessment shall include observation of the student and communication with the student's parent(s)/guardian(s). It shall also include an evaluation of the student's adaptive social functioning and emotional development and of the family, social, and cultural factors which influence the student's learning and behavior in the educational setting.

LABDIEN [Hello]! My name is Hannah Rosenthal, and I am the Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat Anti-Semitism at the U.S. Department of State. In Latvian, envoy means “Īpašā sūtne”. Thank you for inviting me here today to speak to you about the importance of diversity and respect for others. I am always eager to speak to young students because so much of my work depends on your help.
As the Special Envoy, it is my job to monitor anti-Semitic incidents and combat such intolerance. “Anti-Semitism” simply means hatred for Jewish people. I monitor anti-Semitic incidents such as vandalism of religious places, anti-Semitic speech, and even violence against Jews.
But the truth is, I am in the relationship-building business. I am here today to tell you that young people and students can have an impact and do what I do. We must all share and strive for the same mission: to combat hate and intolerance to create a more peaceful and just world.
In order to fight hatred, we must begin with respecting the dignity of every individual, regardless of his or her beliefs. In fact, our differences make us human. You may have heard about the concept of the “Other,” or in Latvian, “svešinieks”. There are individuals in this world who would like us to view some people as outside the larger human family.
The desire to stamp out or suppress or ostracize certain individuals because of who they are, how they worship, or who they love is an obstacle for all members of society. Intolerance prevents us from creating a just and peaceful society. Meanwhile, we, as society, must not stand by idly. When we stand by passively, we also pay a price.
Terrible things can happen when intolerance and racism take hold in a society, across a continent. Hitler’s Nazi ideology called for racial purity and targeted the Jews as an Other that needed to be exterminated. Some of you may know that yesterday communities around the world observed Yom HaShoah, or Holocaust Remembrance Day. Yom HaShoah is a day to remember the victims of the Holocaust and to commemorate the individuals – including some Latvians -- who risked their lives to save the Jews. I understand Latvia has its own official Holocaust Remembrance Day on July 4. While we officially commemorate the Holocaust on these days, we must carry their lessons with us every day. We must stand against attitudes that value some individuals below others. We must expand the circle of rights and opportunities to all people – advancing their freedoms and possibilities.
Intolerance is a moral, a political, and a social problem. But it is also a solvable one. It is not unchangeable. We are not born hating. Somewhere we learn to hate. We can, in fact, make hatred and intolerance something of the past. But this demands our attention. It’s not easy work, but it is urgent work.
At the U.S. Department of State (which is like the Foreign Ministry in Latvia) I work within the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor. The primary and overarching goal of the Bureau is to promote freedom and democracy and protect human rights around the world. We are constantly strengthening our policies and pushing ourselves and others to break down former walls of intolerance. Over the past three years, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton has made the human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people – “LGBT” in shorthand -- a priority of our human rights policy. As Secretary Clinton emphatically stated, “Gay rights are human rights and human rights are gay rights.”
In the United States, we are inspired by the idea that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. The United States has a strong multi-ethnic heritage. Over the course of centuries, many people have immigrated to the United States in hopes of a better life with more opportunities. We embrace this diversity and continue to uphold these values in our everyday lives, actions and laws.
I am learning that Latvia too has a diverse and multicultural history. Various tribes -- the Livs, the Letts, and the Cours -- lived here for many centuries. People from Belarus, Germany, Russia, Sweden, Ukraine, and many other places have played an important part in Latvia’s history. Jews have also contributed to Latvia’s heritage since the sixteenth century. In the eighteenth century, a Jewish man named Abraham Kuntze invented the famous Rigas Balzam (Latvia’s signature liquor). Latvia’s Jews backed the independence movement in the early twentieth century, with hundreds volunteering for service in the Latvian Army and fighting heroically during the war for independence. Latvia’s Jews thrived during the independence period of the 1920s and 30s, serving in parliament and helping write Latvia’s constitution. Zigfrids Meierovics, the first Foreign Minister of Latvia, and twice Prime Minister, had a Jewish father.
Sadly, when the Soviets arrived in Latvia in 1940, they shut down Jewish institutions and seized Jews’ property. When the Soviets deported tens of thousands of Latvians to Siberia, hundreds of Latvian Jews were deported as well. And then, just over one year later, the Holocaust followed and approximately 70,000 of Latvia’s Jews – almost 90 percent – were murdered by the Nazis and their accomplices.
And yet, the Jewish people survived in Latvia. In the 1980s and 90s, Latvia’s Jews once again supported Latvian independence from the Soviet Union, lending their efforts to those of the Popular Front of Latvia. Jews stood on the barricades in 1991. Today, Jews – along with all other Latvians -- are free to practice their faith and to celebrate their culture in a free Latvia. Latvian society is richer, and more diverse, because of the contributions of all these people.
Of course, neither Latvia, nor the United States, is perfect. There are people in both of our countries who do not believe in diversity and respect in every society. However, if we condemn their words of hate, we can spread the message of dignity and respect.
Anti-Semitism and other forms of hatred attack the very idea that every individual is born free and equal in dignity and rights. But Jews, Christians, Muslims and all religious communities are all part of the same family we call humanity. As a child of a Holocaust survivor, anti-Semitism is something very personal to me. My father was arrested – on Kristallnacht, the unofficial pogrom that many think started the Holocaust – and sent with many fellow Jews to prison and then to the Buchenwald concentration camp in Germany. And he was the lucky one – every other person in his family was murdered at Auschwitz. I have dedicated my life to eradicating anti-Semitism and intolerance with a sense of urgency and passion that only my father could give me.
At the State Department, we are trying to make human rights a human reality. As the Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat Anti-Semitism, I have recognized that this will not be possible without the help of you, our youth and future leaders.
Last year my colleague Farah Pandith, the Special Representative to Muslims Communities, and I launched a virtual campaign called “2011 Hours Against Hate,” using Facebook. Perhaps you have heard of it? We are asking you, young people around the world, to pledge a number of hours to volunteer to help or serve a population different than their own. We ask that you work with people who may look different, or pray differently or live differently. For example, a young Jew might volunteer time to read books at a Muslim pre-school, or a Russian Orthodox at a Jewish clinic, or a Muslim at a Baha’i food pantry, or a straight woman at an LGBT center. We want to encourage YOU to walk a mile in another person’s shoes. And while our goal was to get 2011 hours pledged, at the end of last year youth all over the world had pledged tens of thousands of hours.
The campaign was, in fact, so successful that we continued it into 2012. Thanks to a group of British non-governmental organizations, we are now also partnering with the London Olympic and Paralympic Games! In January, the London Olympic and Paralympics approved our application to have 2012 Hours Against Hate branded with the Olympics logo. We can now leverage the energy surrounding the 2012 Olympics to encourage athletes and fans alike to participate in combating hate and pledging their time to help or serve someone who is different from them.
Farah and I have met hundreds of young people – students and young professionals – in Europe, the Middle East and Central Asia. They want to DO something. And I have a feeling that YOU want to DO something too. Last summer, Farah and I met with youth and interfaith leaders in Jordan, Lebanon, and Saudi Arabia, and discussed reaching out to others, increasing tolerance and understanding among different religious groups, and addressed intolerance in their textbooks and lessons. Last month we traveled to Albania to encourage students from Tirana University and the local Madrasah to participate in 2012 Hours Against Hate. We held a panel discussion on the importance of religious diversity, and encouraged Albanian youth to live up to their country’s important legacy of acceptance and courage: Albania was the only country that saved all of its Jews during the Holocaust. Really, we have just begun.
So while I fight anti-Semitism, I am also aware that hate is hate. Nothing justifies it – not economic instability, not international events, not isolated incidents of hate.
Since the beginning of humankind, hate has been around, but since then too, good people of all faiths and backgrounds have worked to combat it. The Jewish tradition tells us that “you are not required to complete the task, but neither are you free to desist from it.”
Together, we must confront and combat the many forms of hatred in our world today. Where there is hatred born of ignorance, we must teach and inspire. Where there is hatred born of blindness, we must expose people to a larger world of ideas and reach out, especially to youth, so they can see beyond their immediate circumstances. Where there is hatred whipped up by irresponsible leaders, we must call them out and answer as strongly as we can – and make their message totally unacceptable to all people of conscience.
Thank you again for inviting me here to speak to you today. I am now happy and excited to answer your questions.

Giant Water Scavenger Beetle
|Geographical Range||North America|
|Scientific Name||Hydrophilus triangularis|
|Conservation Status||Not listed by IUCN|
The name says it all. This large beetle lives in water, where it scavenges vegetation and insect parts. The insect can store a supply of air within its silvery belly, much like a deep-sea diver stores air in a tank.

January 23, 2007:
The paper by researchers at Yale, the University of Winnipeg, Stony Brook University, and led by University of Florida paleontologist Jonathan Bloch reconstructs the base of the primate family tree by comparing skeletal and fossil specimens representing more than 85 modern and extinct species. The team also discovered two 56-million-year-old fossils, including the most primitive primate skeleton ever described.
In the two-part study, an extensive evaluation of skeletal structures provides evidence that plesiadapiforms, a group of archaic mammals once thought to be more closely related to flying lemurs, are the most primitive primates. The team analyzed 173 characteristics of modern primates, tree shrews, flying lemurs with plesiadapiform skeletons to determine their evolutionary relationships. High-resolution CT scanning made fine resolution of inaccessible structures inside the skulls possible.
"This is the first study to bring it all together," said co-author Eric Sargis, associate professor of anthropology at Yale University and Assistant Curator of Vertebrate Zoology at Yale's Peabody Museum of Natural History. "The extensive dataset, the number and type of characteristics we were able to compare, and the availability of full skeletons, let us test far more than any previous study."
At least five major features characterize modern primates: relatively large brains, enhanced vision and eyes that face forward, a specialized ability to leap, nails instead of claws on at least the first toes, and specialized grasping hands and feet. Plesiadapiforms have some but not all of these traits. The article argues that these early primates may have acquired the traits over 10 million years in incremental changes to exploit their environment.
While the study did not include a molecular evaluation of the samples, according to Sargis, these results are consistent with molecular studies on related living groups. Compatibility with the independent molecular data increases the researchers' confidence in their own results.
Bloch discovered the new plesiadapiform species, Ignacius clarkforkensis and Dryomomys szalayi, just outside Yellowstone National Park in the Bighorn Basin with co-author Doug Boyer, a graduate student in anatomical sciences at Stony Brook. Previously, based only on skulls and isolated bones, scientists proposed that Ignacius was not an archaic primate, but instead a gliding mammal related to flying lemurs. However, analysis of a more complete and well-preserved skeleton by Bloch and his team altered this idea.
"These fossil finds from Wyoming show that our earliest primate ancestors were the size of a mouse, ate fruit and lived in the trees," said study leader Jonathan Bloch, a vertebrate paleontology curator at the Florida Museum of Natural History. "It is remarkable to think we are still discovering new fossil species in an area studied by paleontologists for over 100 years."
Researchers previously hypothesized plesiadapiforms as the ancestors of modern primates, but the idea generated strong debate within the primatology community. This study places the origins of Plesiadapiforms in the Paleocene, about 65 (million) to 55 million years ago in the period between the extinction of the dinosaurs and the first appearance of a number of undisputed members of the modern orders of mammals.
"Plesiadapiforms have long been one of the most controversial groups in mammalian phylogeny," said Michael J. Novacek, curator of paleontology at the American Museum of Natural History. "First, they are somewhere near primates and us. Second, historically they have offered tantalizing, but very often incomplete, fossil evidence. But the specimens in their study are beautifully and spectacularly preserved."
"The results of this study suggest that plesiadapiforms are the critical taxa to study in understanding the earliest phases of human evolution. As such, they should be of very broad interest to biologists, paleontologists, and anthropologists," said co-author Mary Silcox, professor of anthropology at the University of Winnipeg.
"This collaboration is the first to bring together evidence from all regions of the skeleton, and offers a well-supported perspective on the structure of the earliest part of the primate family tree," Bloch said.
The research was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation, Field Museum of Natural History, Yale University, Sigma Xi Scientific Research Society, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (Canada), University of Winnipeg, the Paleobiological Fund, and The Wenner--Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research.

Crime and Personality: Personality Theory and Criminality Examined
Keywords: Criminality Personality Theory Criminal Personality Crime And Personality Criminology Psychopathy
The search for the criminal personality or super trait has captured both the minds and imaginations of academics and the wider community (Caspi et al., 1994). Partly, this is due to a stubborn aversion to the notion that normal, regular people rape, murder, or molest children (Barlow, 1990). Secondly, there is a desire for simple, straightforward answers (Bartol, 1991).
Generally, personality theorists endeavor to put together the puzzle of the human personality. Temperament is the term used for the childhood counterpart to personality (Farrington & Jolliffe, 2004). Facets of personality or temperament, traits, are combined together into super traits or broad dimension of personality. Personality traits are persisting underlying tendencies to act in certain ways in particular situations (Farrington & Jolliffe, 2004). Traits shape the emotional and experiential spheres of life, defining how people perceive their world and predict physical and psychological outcomes (Roberts, 2009). Various structured models of personality exist, each with a set of traits and super traits (Miller & Lynam, 2001).
Personality and crime have been linked in two general ways. First, in “personality-trait psychology” (Akers & Sellers, 2009, p. 74) certain traits or super traits within a structured model of personality may be linked to antisocial behavior (ASB).1 As reviewed by Miller and Lynam (2001), four structured models of personality theory were found to be widely used in criminological research and are considered reliable: the five-factor model (FFM; McCrae & Costa, 1990), the PEN model (Eysenck, 1977), Tellegen’s three-factor model (1985), and Cloninger’s temperament and character model (Cloninger, Dragan, Svraki, & Przybeck, 1993). In Table 1, the traits of these models are listed and defined. Eysenck hypothesized specific associations between the PEN model and ASB, proposing that the typical criminal would possess high levels of all three of his proposed personality dimensions. Cloninger hypothesized a link between ASB and personality dimensions from his model, stating that ASB would be linked to high novelty seeking, low harm avoidance, and low reward dependence (see Table 1).
The second way that personality theorists have linked personality to crime is through “personality-type psychology” (Akers & Sellers, 2009, p. 74) or by asserting that certain deviant, abnormal individuals possess a criminal personality, labeled psychopathic, sociopathic, or antisocial. The complex and twisting history of the term and concept of psychopathy can be traced back to the early 1800s (Feeney, 2003), contributing to its common misuse by both academics and nonacademics.2 Hare (1993, 1996) set forth a psychological schematic of persistent offenders who possess certain dysfunctional interpersonal, affective, and behavioral qualities and make up about one percentage of the population. The distinguishing interpersonal and affective characteristic of psychopaths is the dual possession of absolute self-centeredness, grandiosity, callousness, and lack of remorse or empathy for others coupled with a charismatic, charming, and manipulative superficiality (Hare, 1993). The defining behavioral characteristics of psychopaths are impulsivity, irresponsibility, risk taking, and antisocial behavior (Hare, 1993). Table 2 displays the emotional, interpersonal, and acts of social deviance hypothesized to indicate psychopathy. The term antisocial, not psychopath or sociopath, is now used by the American Psychological Association in the latest Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-IV-TR, 2000). This disorder manifests itself as a persistent disregard for and violation of the rights of others, beginning at an early age and persisting into adulthood. The DSM-IV-TR (2000) outlines the antisocial personality disorder as a broader clinical disorder than psychopathy, a diagnosis that could easily be applied to many who engage in criminal behavior (see Table 2).
Concerns Related to Theoretical Propositions and Policy Implications
Certain personality theorists such as Eysenck (1977) postulated that personality traits stem from biological causes. For example, Eysenck noted that arousal levels are directly associated with the personality trait of extraversion (Eysenck, 1977) and testosterone levels are linked to levels of psychotocism (Eysenck, 1997). The biologically deterministic premise postulated within segments of personality theory sparked an intense debate in criminology (Andrews & Wormith, 1989; Gibbons, 1989), which provides just a glimpse into a chasm in the field of criminology that has been rupturing for decades.
Criticisms against deterministic thought can best be understood within the historical context (Hirschi & Hindelang, 1977; Laub & Sampson, 1991; Rafter, 2006). Criminology is a field full of deep schisms and sharp debates, a sort of “hybrid” discipline (Gibbons, 1989), with even the historical accounts of criminology being disputed (Brown, 2006; Forsythe, 1995; Garland, 1997; Jones, 2008; Rafter, 2004). Yet, it is generally agreed that the foundations for understanding criminal behavior, even the justification for the existence of the discipline of criminology, is rooted in psychobiological perspectives (Brown, 2006; Garland, 1997; Glicksohn, 2002; Jones, 2008). Many of those considered to be the founders of criminology collaborated with psychiatrists focusing on the rehabilitation and medical or psychological treatment of criminal deviance, viewing such behavior as a disease of the mind or intellect rather than holding to the more primitive explanations that attributed crime to manifestations of evil spirits or sinfulness (Hervé, 2007; Jones, 2008; Rafter, 2004).
With the dawning of the ideals of the Enlightenment, interest grew in the notion that just as there are natural laws that act upon the physical world, there may be underlying forces that propel individuals or groups to react in certain ways (Jones, 2008). Two distinct schools of positivism arose during this period, those who assumed that these underlying forces were societal and those who assumed that the forces propelling criminal behavior were individualistic or psychological. One faction of nineteenth century positivists, with researchers such as Guerry and Quetelet, focused primarily on societal forces and emphasized geographical differences in crime rates, especially the effects of urbanization (Jones, 2008; Quetelet, 2003). At the core of this work was the idea that individuals do not have free will to act upon their societal environment, but rather are being acted upon by social forces; “Society prepares crime and the criminal is only the instrument that executes them” (Quetelet, Physique Sociale, quoted in Jones, 2008, p. 8).
However, the name most associated with nineteenth century positivism is Cesare Lombroso. Lombroso considered criminal behavior as indicative of degeneration to a lower level of functioning caused by brain damage or from certain genetic impacts (such as birth defects passed to children born of diseased or alcoholic parents), which impeded natural development (Glicksohn, 2002; Jones, 2008). Jones (2008) notes that Lombroso’ antagonists recount his professed allegiance to the use of the scientific method, yet they also detail how he would elaborate wildly, speculating far beyond the bounds of his empirical observations. Occasionally, Lombroso’s work is completely omitted from texts advocating individualistic or psychological approaches to criminal behavior, as Lombroso’s work is seen as an embarrassment and deemed a precursor to the Nazi ideology of the Ayran race (Jones, 2008; Rafter, 2006). Against this blemished backdrop of Nazi ideologies of racial hygiene, labeled biological determinism, sociologically inclined theories flourished within criminology and individualistic explanations for criminality were deserted as taboo and unmentionable (Andrews & Wormith, 1989; Glicksohn, 2002; Hirschi & Hindelang, 1977; Laub & Sampson, 1991).
Concerns about Policy Implications
Within such a historical context, ethical and moral concerns were raised regarding personality theory leading to inequitable or brutish policies (Rafter, 2006). Fears of policy recommendations forcing medical procedures, drug treatment, or excessively restrictive practices were common concerns levied against highly deterministic psychological theories (Bartol & Bartol, 2004; Gibbons, 1986; Jones, 2008). Labeling or stigmatizing persons as psychopaths, sociopaths, or antisocial, raised concerns that such labels might lead to unmerited, harsh sentences, as such individuals would be deemed as incorrigible (Andrews & Wormith, 1989). Conversely, there were concerns that labeling offenders with personality disorders could result in doubts about their culpability for crimes, leading to undue leniency (Bartol & Bartol, 2004).Continued on Next Page »
Download Article (PDF)This article is available as a PDF file.
Download PDF »
Subscribe to Updates
Did you enjoy this article? Subscribe to the Student Pulse RSS or follow us on Twitter to receive our latest updates.
On Topic These keywords are trending in Criminal Justice
Calling All College Students!
We know how hard you've worked on your school papers, so take a few minutes to blow the dust off your hard drive and contribute your work to a world that is hungry for information.
It's a good feeling to see your name in print, and it's even better to know that thousands of people will read, share, and talk about what you have to say.

They say anyone can follow a recipe. But even experienced cooks know things don't always work out. Often the problem lies in how the ingredients are measured - and what they're measured in.
Clear cups, with pour spouts, are primarily for liquids. They come in multiple-quart and 1-, 2-, and 4-cup sizes, with measurements marked on the sides. Set on a level surface and pour in ingredients; read markings at eye level. The larger sizes also work well for chunky foods like vegetables (cherry tomatoes, broccoli florets, hunks of squash), cut-up fruit, and berries.
Metal or plastic cups, for measuring dry ingredients, come in sets of 1/4, 1/3, 1/2, and 1 cup; some sets also include a 1/8-cup or 2-cup or larger unit. Fill to the brim and scrape the ingredient level with a spatula or straight-sided knife. How you fill the cup depends on the ingredient. Pour or spoon in granulated sugar, salt, grains, cornmeal, and other substances that don't pack down. Pack in brown sugar, soft cheeses, and solid fats. Spoon or drop in shredded cheeses and leafy vegetables (unless recipe says to pack). To measure fluffy items like flour, powdered sugar, or cornstarch, stir them first, then gently spoon into cup; if you scoop them with the cup or tap it to settle the contents, you can get as much as 25 percent more in the cup.
Standard measuring spoons come in sets of 1 tablespoon, 1, 1/2, and 1/4 teaspoon, and sometimes 1/8 teaspoon. Use these for both liquid and dry ingredients, pouring liquids to the rim and scraping dry ingredients level with rim.

Posted by admin on August 21st, 2008
Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) the size (in bytes) of the largest packet or frame that a given layer of a communications protocol can pass onwards. The MTU may be fixed by standards (as is the case with Ethernet) or decided at connect time. A higher MTU brings higher bandwidth efficiency. However, large packets can block up a slow interface for some time, increasing the lag for further packets.
The MTU for ethernet is 1500 bytes, 1492 for PPPoE and 576 for Dialup. In very rare occasions, you may need to change the MTU size due to connectivity issues with your ISPs or in a VPN environment on your openSUSE.
The following procedure should help to change the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) in openSUSE.
In Network Manager
If you are using Network-Manager to control the network settings in your openSUSE then
1. From the menu, click Computer – YaST.
2. Click Network Devices in the leftpane and click Network Settings
3. Select the Network Adapter and click Edit.
4. Under General tab, select from the default “MTU” values or enter your own required value. Please be aware of what you are doing as an incorrect MTU size setting can cause connectivity and performance issues. Click Next and Finish to complete the settings wizard.
This will set the MTU value and restart the Network Service.
In traditional Network configuration
If you are not using the Network Manager and use the traditional method of controlling network settings using ifcfg scripts then
1. Using a terminal window, change directory to /etc/sysconfig/network/
opensuse:~ # cd /etc/sysconfig/network
2. In /etc/sysconfig/network directory, you have a config file for each of your network interface card. For instance, on my laptop, I have ifcfg-eth0 (ethernet) and ifcfg-wlan0 (wireless). These hold configurations for the respective network cards. Edit the interface file and enter the line as following
opensuse:/etc/sysconfig/network # vi ifcfg-eth0
and add a line like
So it looks something like this
opensuse11:/etc/sysconfig/network # cat ifcfg-eth0
3. Restart the network service or reboot your computer for the changes to take effect.
opensuse11:/etc/sysconfig/network # /etc/init.d/network restart
Dynamically change MTU
To dynamically change the MTU, you can use the ifconfig command. To change the MTU of interface eth0,
opensuse11:~ # ifconfig eth0 mtu 1460
However, this will be lost upon reboot.

This series enables children to use the computer for independent research into a range of curriculum related topics. They read the information from talking books and then link to writing grids so they can write about what they have read. High quality real speech gives added support on both the reading and writing activities. Perfect for the reading strand throughout the literacy curriculum!
This resource lets you find out about the different parts of a plant. Learn about plant habitats and some of the ways that plants are used by people. Use the information about growth and reproduction to write about pollination, fertilization, and seed dispersal.
"Find Out" information is presented in three levels of difficulty, designed to meet the needs of children with a wide range of abilities.
- Book One/Level One - The information is presented in short sentences. The associated writing grids enable children to work with sentence beginnings and endings to recreate the sentences from each information page.
- Book Two/Level Two - The information pages contain flowing text, and the writing grids offer a wider choice of words. This enables students to construct their own sentences.
- Book Three/Level Three - This level includes more in-depth information. The writing grids offer sentence starters and word banks than enable students to write an extended piece of text. Students use the keyboard as well as the grid as they interpret and respond to the text.
Find Out and Write About Series
Packed with rich multimedia content that is perfect for both literacy and subject teaching
The unique Find Out and Write About series for Clicker provides a range of multimedia CDs ideal for literacy teaching. Early readers of all ages can research the non-fiction material and then use the associated writing grids to write about what they have learnt.
A Find Out and Write About CD-ROM contains an interactive talking book of non-fiction text. Children can read the text or click the `listen` button to hear it spoken. Children can also click on a word with the right-hand mouse button to hear it.
Each page of the book contains a link to a Clicker writing grid that relates directly to that page, so children can write about the information they have just learned. Children write by clicking on a word with the left-hand mouse button. Words are colour-coded to help writers compose sentences successfully.
Emergent, struggling and fluent readers can all use the resources, as the information is provided at three differentiated levels. At level 1 for example, students are given short sentences, which they can choose to have read to them. The writing grids, relating directly to each page, enable students to work with sentence beginnings and endings. By Level 3, there is flowing in-depth information and the writing grid enables the student to interpret and respond to the text using the grid to scaffold their writing.
- Content-rich resources for both literacy and subject teaching
- Differentiated for children of all ages
- Listen to all text as real speech
- Printed outcome for monitoring by the teacher
- Hugely motivating for all ability levels
- Fully switch accessible for students with physical disabilities
- Great for whole class teaching with a whiteboard or touchscreen monitors, as well as individual work

The lushly forested nation of Guyana on Thursday joined a regional pact to protect jaguars, the elusive spotted cat that is the biggest land predator in the Americas, but is vulnerable due to expanded agriculture and mining that have carved away at their fragmented habitat.
Leaders of the government’s environment ministry were signing an agreement with the New York-based conservation group Panthera, which is trying to establish a “jaguar corridor,” a network of pathways that would link core jaguar populations from northern Argentina to Mexico. Guyana is pledging to ensure the protection of jaguars, the national animal that is a near-threatened species.
The South American nation with some of the region’s least spoiled wilderness joins Colombia and nations in Central America in recognizing the corridor and agreeing to work toward the long-term conservation of jaguars, said Esteban Payan, regional director for Panthera’s northern South America jaguar program.
A network of cameras equipped with motion sensors and fixed to tree trunks has revealed tantalizing glimpses of sleek, solitary jaguars slinking through Guyana’s dense rain forests and vast grasslands stretching to the country’s border with Brazil.
Scientists reported finding a relatively healthy jaguar density of three to four animals per 100km in Guyana’s southern Rupununi Savannah. That means that preserving grasslands are as important to conservation of jaguars as protecting the dense rain forests, they say.
Evi Paemelaere, a Belgian jaguar scientist with Panthera, said Amerindian villagers in remote spots in Guyana have helped her set up cameras along the roads and hunting trails that the big cats like to travel on.
“Amerindians are very keen on being part of the project,” she said from Georgetown, Guyana’s capital.
Jaguars once roamed widely from the southwestern US to Argentina, but have lost nearly half of their natural territory and have disappeared altogether from some countries. Heavy hunting for their spotted coats decimated their numbers in the 1960s and early 1970s until the pelt trade was largely halted.
No one has any reliable estimates of how many jaguars are left in the wild, where they prey on peccaries, tapirs and, since they are powerful swimmers, river turtles.

The Online Teacher Resource
Receive free lesson plans, printables, and worksheets by email:
- Over 400 Pages
- Great Writing Habits.
- Character Sketches, Plot Summaries
- Excellent for students
Age Range: Kindergarten through Grade 2 (Early Elementary or Primary Level)
Overview and Purpose : In this activity, students imagine what they would like to have fall from the sky every day and describe what happens when too much of it falls at once.
Objective: The student will be able to write a short story and draw a picture of what favorite item they would like to have fall from the sky every day.
Drawing paper/writing paper
Read Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs to your students. Talk about what happened to the town. Have your students write a short story about what they would like to have fall from the sky everyday and what would happen if it got out of control. When they are finished writing, have them draw a picture of their story. Have the students share their stories with the class when they are finished.
This activity can also be done in small groups. The students can decide on one thing they would like to have fall from the sky and then tell their story.

This is a great activity that goes with the new book in the Sir Cumference series. The book is titled Sir Cumference and the Viking's Map. It is a story that correlates with coordinate graphing. The activity I made to go along with the book is a "map" graph and a set of ten sentences that have students mark an X at each of the stops (coordinate points). This is a great way to tie reading into your math lesson or math into a reading lesson.

They are not expecting any angry birds, but bird-watchers are already seeing evidence of what is expected to be a major invasion of hungry birds winging through the region.
Normally content to hang out in the deep forests of Canada, grosbeaks, pine siskins, finches, redpolls and other seed-eaters are winging their way south, hoping to find something to eat. The tree seed crop, normally plentiful in the forests of Ontario and Quebec, has in some cases failed completely, causing what is known as a bird irruption.
“The invasion is under way,” said David Small, president of the Athol Bird and Nature Club and one of the Central Massachusetts bird count leaders. “I had redpolls Sunday at the home feeder, which don't show up every year, and often not until January or February.”
Mr. Small, who is a supervisor at the Quabbin Reservoir, said he has been seeing pine grosbeaks at the reservoir headquarters and several locations. Central Massachusetts birders also report seeing white-winged and red crossbills.
“I was at Plum Island and Salisbury in early November and saw 250-plus white-winged crossbills,” he said. “So a big year is upon us. I can't recall a year it started this early with such diversity and large numbers.”
Based on data from ornithologists in Ontario, the National Audubon Society issued a winter bird warning — not really warning of disaster — that because there is so little to eat up north, a bird invasion is under way. The warning was issued more for the interest of those who will take part in the Audubon's Christmas Bird Count, which takes place all over the country from Dec. 14 through Jan. 5. The bird count often offers up data to support what ornithologists are predicting based on climate conditions. The seed crop failure may have been connected to a lack of rainfall. Central and Eastern Canada experienced long-term drought conditions this year.
Over the years, some species of seed-eating birds have been seen in small numbers; some are not seen for several years at a time, but the region saw a flood of pine siskins pass through in October and November. The birds enjoyed what they could get from the limited number of feeders out in Central Massachusetts at the time and headed off, possibly making their way as far south as North and South Carolina.
This year's small bird irruption followed a banner year for the eye candy of wild birds — snowy owls. The large white raptors were seen throughout the country as they, too, went off in search of food.
Irruptions occur regularly when food supplies of various types are disrupted. In the case of the owls, it was a lack of small mammals for them to eat.
Local birders have been keeping close watch on the ebb and flow of species. Recently there have been reports on WPI's Central Massachusetts Bird Update list of pine grosbeaks at Quaboag Pond in Brookfield and Worcester Airport. There have also been large numbers of pine grosbeaks seen in downtown Westminster, Royalston Common and several areas of Gardner and Lunenburg.
Bill Cormier, co-owner of The Bird Store and More in Sturbridge, said bird activity has been very active this early winter.
“There was a big wave of pine siskins that came through here earlier in the season,” he said.
Mr. Cormier said he is interested to see what is collected during the Sturbridge Christmas Bird Count, set for Dec. 18. The count will be led by local bird observer Mark Lynch; after 24 hours of recording birds, volunteers will report their data to compilers at The Bird Store.
Along with bird counts in Athol and Sturbridge, there will be counts in Worcester, Uxbridge and Westminster.
Feeders are an important part of the bird-count effort, and Mr. Cormier said he recommends black oil sunflower seeds with some nuts mixed in.
“Nuts are a major ingredient,” he said.
The birds expected or already seen in this irruption are mostly regular sights in Central Massachusetts, although in smaller numbers, but a few are fairly rare.
“We rarely get a hoary redpoll,” Mr. Small said.
The hoary redpoll's range is mostly no farther south than the Canadian border, but Mr. Small said even it is a possibility this year.
The Athol and Worcester Christmas Bird Counts will be held Dec. 15, Westminster will be Dec. 23 and Quabbin and Uxbridge will be Dec. 29.

Arnold Henry Guyot
||This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. (June 2012)|
|Arnold Henry Guyot|
Arnold Henry Guyot
|Born||September 28, 1807
Boudevilliers, Canton of Neuchâtel, Switzerland
|Died||February 8, 1884
Princeton, New Jersey, United States
Guyot was born at Boudevilliers, near Neuchâtel, Switzerland. He was educated at Chaux-de-Fonds, then at the college of Neuchâtel. In 1825, he went to Germany, and resided in Karlsruhe where he met Louis Agassiz, the beginning of a lifelong friendship. From Karlsruhe he moved to Stuttgart, where he studied at the gymnasium. He returned to Neuchâtel in 1827. He determined to enter the ministry and started at the University of Berlin to attend lectures. While pursuing his studies, he also attended lectures on philosophy and natural science. His leisure was spent in collecting shells and plants, and he received an entrée to the Berlin Botanical Garden from Humboldt. In 1835, he received the degree of Ph.D. from Berlin.
In 1838, at Agassiz's suggestion, he visited the Swiss glaciers and communicated the results of his six weeks' investigation to the Geological Society of France. He was the first to point out certain important observations relating to glacial motion and structure. Among other things he noted the more rapid flow of the center than of the sides, and the more rapid flow of the top than of the bottom of glaciers; described the laminated or ribboned structure of the glacial ice; and ascribed the movement of glaciers to a gradual molecular displacement rather than to a sliding of the ice mass as held by de Saussure. He subsequently collected important data concerning erratic boulders.
In 1839, he became the colleague of Agassiz as professor of history and physical geography at the College of Neuchâtel (a.k.a. Neuchâtel Academy?). The suspension of that institution in 1848 caused Guyot to emigrate, at Agassiz's instance, to the United States, where he settled in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He delivered a course of lectures at the Lowell Institute which were afterward published as Earth and Man (Boston 1853). For several years the Massachusetts Board of Education retained his services as a lecturer on geography and methods of instruction to the normal schools and teachers' institutes.
He was occupied with this work until his appointment, in 1854, as professor of physical geography and geology at Princeton University, which office he retained until his death. He was also for several years lecturer on physical geography in the State Normal School in Trenton, New Jersey, and from 1861 to 1866 lecturer in the Princeton Theological Seminary. He also gave courses in the Union Theological Seminary, New York, and at Columbia College. He founded the museum at Princeton, many of the specimens of which are from his own collections.
His scientific work in the United States included the perfection of plans for a national system of meteorological observations. Most of these were conducted under the auspices of the Smithsonian Institution. His extensive meteorological observations led to the establishment of the United States Weather Bureau, and his Meteorological and Physical Tables (1852, revised ed. 1884) were long standard.
His graded series of text-books and wall-maps were important aids in the extension and popularization of geological study in America. In addition to text-books, his principal publications were:
- Earth and Man, Lectures on Comparative Physical Geography in its Relation to the History of Mankind (translated by Cornelius Conway Felton, 1849)
- A Memoir of Louis Agassiz (1883)
- Creation, or the Biblical Cosmogony in the Light of Modern Science (1884).
- Johnson’s New Universal Cyclopaedia (1876) - editor-in-chief along with Frederick Augustus Porter Barnard
He is the namesake of several geographical features, including Guyot Glacier in Alaska, Mount Guyot on the North Carolina and Tennessee border, and a different Mount Guyot in New Hampshire, as well as Mount Guyot on the Rocky Mountain Continental Divide in Colorado. The building housing the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and the Department of Geosciences at Princeton is named Guyot Hall in his honor.
- James Dwight Dana's Memoir in the Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Science, vol. ii. (Washington, 1886).
- This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Guyot, Arnold Henry". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
- Beach, Chandler B., ed. (1914). "Guyot, Arnold". The New Student's Reference Work. Chicago: F. E. Compton and Co.
- "Guyot, Arnold". Encyclopedia Americana. 1920.
- Tables, Meteorological and Physical Prepared for the Smithsonian Institution (1858)
- Tables, Meteorological and Physical Prepared for the Smithsonian Institution (1884)
- Directions for meteorological observations, and the registry of periodical phenomena (1860)
- Physical Geography (1873)
- The earth and man: lectures on comparative physical geography, in its relation to the history of mankind (1860).
- National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir

The giving of the law at Mount Sinai was the climax of a series of events that began at Passover, the moment and the means of the Israelites' redemption. At Passover they killed a lamb and put the blood on their doorposts. When the death angel passed through to slay the firstborn, those who had blood on the doorposts were spared. God was saving, redeeming, buying back His people.
Mount Sinai adds the other half of the equation. Though redemption through the blood of a lamb (Christ) freed them from sin's dominion and death, the giving of the law at Mount Sinai shows that freeing them is not all that God had in mind. Israel came to Mount Sinai after being redeemed, heard the law, and assented to keep it. God gave the law to show the pattern of life, the principles of righteousness, for the redeemed.
On one side of the coin is grace and on the other is law and obedience. They are harmonious; they cannot be separated. They are both vital parts of the process of sanctification leading to salvation. Grace is given upon repentance from sin, but after repentance, what is a Christian to do with his life? Obedience to God and living a life of holiness become his first priorities, and these work to produce character in the image of God (II Corinthians 3:18).
Amos 5:25 reconfirms that the sacrifice, offering, and shedding of blood is a foundational necessity for a relationship with God. "Did you offer Me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel?" The answer is, "Yes." The people were sacrificing, but is that all that they did? He implies that though they were sacrificing, something was missing—obedience to the law.
God told Israel that He would dwell in the Tabernacle, specifically the Holy of Holies, the symbolism of which we need to understand. The most important piece of furniture inside the Holy of Holies was the Mercy Seat, a wooden chest overlaid with gold. Its lid functioned as the seat. Inside the chest, under the seat, were stored the two tablets of stone, symbolizing God sitting on His law, the basis of His judgment.
When one sins, he begins to separate himself from fellowship with God (Isaiah 59:1-2). He is no longer permitted, as it were, to come into the Holy of Holies. What means did God provide to heal the broken relationship, to restore the fellowship?
One might think that the giving of a sin offering would appease God, and He would forgive the sin. However, Hebrews 10:4 is very clear: "For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and goats could take away sins." Then why did God have the Israelites make these sacrifices? "But in those sacrifices there is a reminder of sins every year" (verse 3). As Amos does not mention the sin offering in Amos 5:22, it seems that Israel did not even make the attempt to be reminded of sin.
So how was fellowship restored? On the Day of Atonement, once a year, the high priest entered the Holy of Holies to sprinkle the Mercy Seat with blood. God's intent in this ritual was to show people that their transgressions of His law were covered by the blood. The redeemed were again in fellowship with God.
The blood and the law are essential parts for maintaining the correct relationship with God. The law is permanent and codifies the nature of God in precepts to help us understand Him clearly. Obedience to His law is a perpetual requirement, with blood available to cover any transgression of it.

This year, millions of New Year’s resolutions will be made – and then broken soon after. But there is one resolution that all men should keep: to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
Prostate cancer is the most common non-skin cancer in America, affecting one in six men, according to the Prostate Cancer Foundation. In addition, heart disease killed 26 percent of the men who died in 2006. And half of the men who die suddenly of coronary heart disease have no previous symptoms, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
There are many simple ways men can reduce their risk for life-threatening health conditions. Make a New Year’s resolution to improve your health and better your life with these easy tips.
Sometimes improving your health is as simple as a trip to the doctor. As you age, the likelihood of being diagnosed with prostate cancer increases significantly. Men over 40 should begin discussing their prostate health with a physician. Catching prostate cancer in its earliest stages can greatly improve a man’s chance at survival, so it’s important to be proactive and talk to your doctor about your prostate health. You can learn more about risk factors and prevention on the Prostate Cancer Foundation’s website at www.PCF.org.
Choosing healthy snacks and avoiding fatty meals can help reduce your risk of heart disease, diabetes and certain forms of cancer. Foods that are low in saturated fat and dietary cholesterol and high in fiber can help prevent high cholesterol, according to the CDC. Additionally, several studies suggest that eating fish can help protect against prostate cancer because they have “good fat,” particularly omega-3 fatty acids.
Maintaining a healthy weight is crucial to preventing heart disease. Physical activity will help lower your blood pressure and cholesterol. According to the Surgeon General, adults should engage in moderately intense exercise for at least 30 minutes a day. By maintaining a healthy weight, you will also lower your risk for diabetes.
Don’t sweat the small stuff. Reducing your stress at work and at home can help improve your overall health and lead to a longer, happier life. Seek medical treatment for stress, high blood pressure, high cholesterol and depression. Treating these conditions may save your life and have been shown to improve survivorship in prostate cancer.
These are resolutions to keep. Now is the perfect time to make changes to improve your health.

WAKING the GIANT Bill McGuire
While we transmit more than two million tweets a day and nearly one hundred trillion emails each year, we're also emitting record amounts of carbon dioxide (CO2). Bill McGuire, professor of geophysical and climate hazards at University College London, expects our continued rise in greenhouse gas emissions to awaken a slumbering giant: the Earth's crust. In Waking the Giant: How a Changing Climate Triggers Earthquakes, Tsunamis and Volcanoes (Oxford University Press), he explains that when the Earth's crust (or geosphere) becomes disrupted from rising temperatures and a C[O.sub.2]-rich atmosphere, natural disasters strike more frequently and with catastrophic force.
Applying a "straightforward presentation of what we know about how climate and the geosphere interact," the book links previous warming periods 20,000 to 5,000 years ago with a greater abundance of tsunamis, landslides, seismic activity and volcanic eruptions. McGuire urgently warns of the "tempestuous future of our own making" as we progressively inch toward a similar climate.
Despite his scientific testimony to Congress stating "what is going on in the Arctic now is the biggest and fastest thing that Nature has ever done" and the "incontrovertible" data that the Earth's climate draws lively response from the geosphere, brutal weather events are still not widely seen as being connected to human influence. Is our global population sleepwalking toward imminent destruction, he asks, until "it is obvious, even to the most entrenched denier, that our climate is being transformed?"

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Preventive medicine or preventive care refers to measures taken to prevent diseases, (or injuries) rather than curing them or treating their symptoms. The term contrasts in method with curative and palliative medicine, and in scope with public health methods (which work at the level of population health rather than individual health).
This takes place at primary, secondary and tertiary prevention levels.
- Primary prevention avoids the development of a disease. Most population-based health promotion activities are primary preventive measures.
- Secondary prevention activities are aimed at early disease detection, thereby increasing opportunities for interventions to prevent progression of the disease and emergence of symptoms.
- Tertiary prevention reduces the negative impact of an already established disease by restoring function and reducing disease-related complications.
- Quaternary prevention is the set of health activities that mitigate or avoid the consequences of unnecessary or excessive interventions in the health system.
Simple examples of preventive medicine include hand washing and immunizations. Preventive care may include examinations and screening tests tailored to an individual's age, health, and family history. For example, a person with a family history of certain cancers or other diseases would begin screening at an earlier age and/or more frequently than those with no family history. On the other side of preventive medicine, some non-profit organizations, such as the Northern California Cancer Center, apply epidemiological research towards finding ways to prevent diseases.
Universal, selective, and indicated
Gordon (1987) in the area of disease prevention, and later Kumpfer and Baxley in the area of substance use proposed a three-tiered preventive intervention classification system: universal, selective, and indicated prevention. Amongst others, this typology has gained favour and is used by the U.S. Institute of Medicine, the NIDA and the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction.
- Universal prevention addresses the entire population (national, local community, school, district) and aim to prevent or delay the abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs. All individuals, without screening, are provided with information and skills necessary to prevent the problem.
- Selective prevention focuses on groups whose risk of developing problems of alcohol abuse or dependence is above average. The subgroups may be distinguished by characteristics such as age, gender, family history, or economic status. For example, drug campaigns in recreational settings.
- Indicated prevention involves a screening process, and aims to identify individuals who exhibit early signs of substance abuse and other problem behaviours. Identifiers may include falling grades among students, known problem consumption or conduct disorders, alienation from parents, school, and positive peer groups etc.
Outside the scope of this three-tier model is environmental prevention. Environmental prevention approaches are typically managed at the regulatory or community level, and focus on interventions to deter drug consumption. Prohibition and bans (e.g. smoking workplace bans, alcohol advertising bans) may be viewed as the ultimate environmental restriction. However, in practice environmental preventions programmes embrace various initiatives at the macro and micro level, from government monopolies for alcohol sales, through roadside sobriety or drug tests, worker/pupil/student drug testing, increased policing in sensitive settings (near schools, at rock festivals), and legislative guidelines aimed at precipitating punishments (warnings, penalties, fines).
Professionals involved in the public health aspect of this practice may be involved in entomology, pest control, and public health inspections. Public health inspections can include recreational waters, pools, beaches, food preparation and serving, and industrial hygiene inspections and surveys.
In the United States, preventive medicine is a medical specialty, one of the 24 recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS). It encompasses three areas of specialization:
- General preventive medicine and public health
- Aerospace medicine
- Occupational medicine
In order to become board-certified in one of the preventive medicine areas of specialization, a licensed U.S. physician (M.D. or D.O.) must successfully complete a preventive medicine medical residency program following a one-year internship. Following that, the physician must complete a year of practice in that special area and pass the preventive medicine board examination. The residency program is at least two years in length and includes completion of a master's degree in public health (MPH) or equivalent. The board exam takes an entire day: the morning session concentrates on general preventive medicine questions, while the afternoon session concentrates on the one of the three areas of specialization that the applicant has studied.
In addition, there are two subspecialty areas of certification:
These certifications require sitting for an examination following successful completion of an MT or UHB fellowship and prior board certification in one of the 24 ABMS-recognized specialties.
Prophylaxis (Greek "προφυλάσσω" to guard or prevent beforehand) is any medical or public health procedure whose purpose is to prevent, rather than treat or cure a disease. In general terms, prophylactic measures are divided between primary prophylaxis (to prevent the development of a disease) and secondary prophylaxis (whereby the disease has already developed and the patient is protected against worsening of this process).
Some specific examples of prophylaxis include:
- Influenza vaccines are prophylactic.
- Antibiotics are sometimes used prophylactically: For example, during the 2001 anthrax attacks scare in the United States, patients believed to be exposed were given ciprofloxacin. In similar manner, the use of antibiotic ointments on burns and other wounds is prophylactic. Antibiotics are also given prophylactically just before some medical procedures such as pacemaker insertion.
- Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) may, with caution, be an example of a chronic migraine preventative (see Amitriptyline and migraines' prevention by medicine).
- Antimalarials such as chloroquine are used both in treatment and as prophylaxis by visitors to countries where malaria is endemic to prevent the development of the parasitic Plasmodium, which cause malaria.
- Condoms are sometimes referred to as "prophylactics" because of their use to prevent the transmission of sexually transmitted infections.
- Low-molecular-weight heparin is used as a prophylaxis in hospital patients, as they are at risk for several forms of thrombosis due to their immobilisation.
- Professional cleaning of the teeth is dental prophylaxis.
- Risk Reducing or Prophylactic Mastectomies may be carried out for carriers of the BRCA mutation gene to minimise the risk of developing Breast Cancer
- Daily and moderate physical exercise in various forms can be called prophylactic because it can maintain or improve one's health. Cycling for transport appears to very significantly improve health by reducing risk of heart diseases, various cancers, muscular- and skeletal diseases, and overall mortality.
- Prophylaxis may be administered as vaccine. Prophylactic vaccines include: PEP, nPEP, PREP, or nPREP. PEP stands for post-exposure prophylaxis used in an occupational setting. nPEP is non-occupational post-exposure prophylaxis. nPEP may be used in a recreational setting; for example, during intercourse, if the condom breaks and one partner is HIV-positive, nPEP will help to decrease the probability of spread of infection of HIV. PREP is often used in occupational settings, e.g., in hospital staff to prevent the spread of HIV or Hepatitis C from patient to staff. nPREP is a measure taken before exposure but in a non-occupational setting (non-occupational Pre-exposure prophylaxis); for example, injection drug users may seek nPREP vaccinations.
Leading cause of preventable death
Leading causes of preventable death worldwide as of the year 2001.
Leading causes of preventable deaths in the United States in the year 2000.
- ^ MeSH Preventive+Medicine
- ^ MeSH Primary+Prevention
- ^ MeSH Secondary+Prevention
- ^ MeSH Tertiary+Prevention
- ^ Gordon, R. (1987), ‘An operational classification of disease prevention’, in Steinberg, J. A. and Silverman, M. M. (eds.), Preventing Mental Disorders, Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1987.
- ^ Kumpfer, K. L., and Baxley, G. B. (1997), 'Drug abuse prevention: What works?', National Institute on Drug Abuse, Rockville.
- ^ How should influenza prophylaxis be implemented?
- ^ de Oliveira JC, Martinelli M, D'Orio Nishioka SA, et al. (2009). "Efficacy of antibiotic prophylaxis prior to the implantation of pacemakers and cardioverter-defibrillators: Results of a large, prospective, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial". Circ Arrhythmia Electrophysiol 2: 29–34. doi:10.1161/CIRCEP.108.795906.
- ^ Lars Bo Andersen et al. (June 2000). "All-cause mortality associated with physical activity during leisure time, work, sports, and cycling to work.". Arch Intern Med. 160 (11): 1621–8. doi:10.1001/archinte.160.11.1621. PMID 10847255.
- ^ Lopez AD, Mathers CD, Ezzati M, Jamison DT, Murray CJ (May 2006). "Global and regional burden of disease and risk factors, 2001: systematic analysis of population health data". Lancet 367 (9524): 1747–57. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68770-9. PMID 16731270.
- ^ Mokdad AH, Marks JS, Stroup DF, Gerberding JL (March 2004). "Actual causes of death in the United States, 2000". JAMA 291 (10): 1238–45. doi:10.1001/jama.291.10.1238. PMID 15010446. http://www.csdp.org/research/1238.pdf.
- Sackett DL. The arrogance of preventive medicine. CMAJ. 2004;167:363-4.
- Gérvas J, Pérez Fernández M. Los límites de la prevención clínica. AMF. 2007; 3(6):352-60.
- Gérvas J, Pérez Fernández M, González de Dios J. Problemas prácticos y éticos de la prevención secundaria. A propósito de dos ejemplos de pediatría. Rev Esp Salud Pública. 2007;81:345-52.
- Starfield B, Hyde J, Gérvas J, Heath I. The concept of prevention: a good idea gone astray? J Epidemiol Community Health. 2008;62(7):580-3.
- Gérvas J, Starfield B, Heath I. Is clinical prevention better than cure? Lancet. 2008;372:1997-9.
- Gérvas J, Pérez Fernández M. Los daños provocados por la prevención y por las actividades preventivas. RISAI. 2009; 1(4).
- Gérvas J. Abuso de la prevención clínica. El cribaje del cáncer de mama como ejemplo. Rev Espaço Saùde. 2009; 11(1):49-53.
- Gérvas J, Heath I, Durán A, Gené J; Members of the Seminar of Primary Health Innovation 2008. Clinical prevention: patients' fear and the doctor's guilt. Eur J Gen Pract. 2009; 15(3):122-4.

Even though Facebook requires users to be at least 13 years old, there are 7.5. million users under that age, most of them not yet 10, according to projections from a "State of the Net" survey conducted by Consumer Reports.
The survey, published in the June issue of Consumer Reports, also found that the accounts of these minors were largely unsupervised by their parents, exposing them to online predators and bullies.
"Despite Facebook's age requirements, many kids are using the site who shouldn't be," Jeff Fox, technology editor for Consumer Reports, said in a release. "What's even more troubling was the finding from our survey that indicated that a majority of parents of kids 10 and under seemed largely unconcerned by their children's use of the site."
Indeed, the survey found that one million children were exposed to online bullying through Facebook in the past year. Use of the site also exposed more than five million U.S. households to virus infections, identity theft and other types of abuse.
To guard against abuse, Consumer Reports recommends parents carefully monitor their children's Facebook accounts, joining their children's circle of friends on the site and either deleting a pre-teen's account or asking Facebook to do so by filling out its "report an underage child" form.
Also, use the site's privacy controls. Roughly one in five adult users said they hadn't, making them more vulnerable to threats. Consumer Reports advices users to set everything you can so that it can only be accessed by people on your friends list. Among the magazine's other recommendations: turn off instant personalization and use apps with caution, both of which can help keep personal information about you from floating around online.
In April, Facebook compared web safety for kids to crossing the street.
"We agree with safety experts that communication between parents/guardians and kids about their use of the Internet is vital," the company said. "Just as parents are always teaching and reminding kids how to cross the road safely, talking about internet safety should be just as important a lesson to learn."
Perhaps kids who aren't yet 13 need to be on Facebook in today's world, but if that's true, then their parents really, really need to make sure they know what they're doing online.
Or perhaps kids shouldn't be allowed to use Facebook until they reach the site's minimum age.
What do you think?

SEA level rises and climate change are linked, say top scientists as they prepare the next major global climate change update.
More than 250 experts from 39 countries are in Hobart this week to review the latest draft of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's report including a new chapter on sea level.
The co-ordinating lead author on the new chapter, CSIRO's Dr John Church, said sea level is clearly linked to climate change.
"The sea level is rising, the rate of the rise has increased and will continue to increase," he said.
He said the rate had increased from a few tenths of a millimetre a year before the 20th century to more than 3mm a year in the past 20 years.
"It's clear the rate of sea level rise has already increased," he said.
"Whether that 3mm is a further acceleration or not is yet unclear but we do expect a further acceleration during the 21st century and it's clearly linked to greater levels of greenhouse gases."
He said thermal expansion because of ocean warming and the melting of glaciers were two key causes of sea level rise.
CSIRO's Dr Steve Rintoul, who is involved with the report's ocean observations chapter, said oceans were very important for climate because of the amount of heat they absorbed and stored.
He said the temperature of the ocean surface had increased by 0.3-0.5C over the past 50 years.
"There's no disputing the oceans are warming," he said.
"It's clear from the published literature that greenhouse gases as well as natural variability have contributed to this observed warming of the ocean."
He said oceans around Tasmania were changing, with recordings showing that temperatures around Maria Island have increased by 1.5C over the past 60 years.
"It's a very large number compared with other parts of the ocean," he said.
The Hobart conference is the last meeting before scientists prepare the final draft of the IPCC report's physical science section. The final report will be submitted in September.

Polish second most spoken language
Polish is the second most common main language in England and Wales with more than half a million speakers, according to new figures from the 2011 Census.
Nearly one in 10 people in England and Wales - 8% - reported speaking a different main language to English or Welsh in the census, findings from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) have shown.
Polish was the second most commonly reported main language with 546,000 speakers, reflecting more than half a million Poles who migrated to England and Wales during the last decade.
Redcar and Cleveland local authority had the highest percentage of people with English as their main language at 99% of the population, with Ealing listing the highest proportion of Polish speakers at 6% of the population.
In all but three of the London boroughs - the City of London, Richmond Upon Thames, and Hillingdon - more than 100 languages were listed as main languages.
Of the four million residents of England and Wales who spoke a main language other than English, 1.7 million said they could speak English very well, 726,000 could speak English but not well and 138,000 could not speak English at all.
The least common main language in England and Wales was listed as Manx-Gaelic with 33 speakers, followed by 58 Gaelic Scottish speakers.
London had the highest proportion, at 22%, of people who reported that English was not their main language, with the North East reporting the lowest percentage in this category, at 3%. The figures also showed that not all languages were spoken - with 22,000 people using sign language.
The census also appeared to confirm a boom in cycling in London, with 161,700 people, or 2.6%, using bicycles to get to work in the capital. This compared with 77,000 a decade ago, the ONS said, but these figures were not strictly comparable as the 2001 figures did not include those who said they worked from home.
Cambridge remained the local authority with the highest proportion who cycle to work, at 18%, or 17,755 people. In spite of the surge in cycling, the majority of 16 to 74-year-olds in England and Wales said they drove a car or van to work, at 58% or 15 million.

THL Toolbox > Audio-Video > Overview
Contributor(s): David Germano, James Graves, Chelsea Hall, Eric Woelfel.
New developments in digital technology and the Web offer exciting new possibilities for the incorporation of audio-video into new areas of research, publication and teaching. They also allow us for the first time to use and explore audio-video creatively in ways previously only possible with texts, such as providing for powerful ways to search media files and giving users tools to creatively alter audio-video files to incorporate into their own work. However, working with audio-video can also be very frustrating, and thus THL has expended considerable energies in developing tools and documentation to provide a systematic framework for the creation, delivery and use of audio-video in research, publication and teaching.
For a beginner's lesson on how to use the AV Database website, please see: Using the THL AV Database.
The overall process from start to finish can be divided into five distinct phases:
- Create the audio-video through recording sessions
- Technically process the media into edited segments in formats usable on a computer
- Catalog the resultant media titles with metadata
- Linguistically process the media titles with transcription, translation, annotation and timecoding
- Package the media title into research publications, or into instructional units, including integration with reference databases, for delivery to end users
Given the demands of such a process, it is vital that an integrated set of tools with proper manuals and broader documentation are available which are free, open source, and suited for educational purposes. We are creating comprehensive documentation for each phase, which themselves involve a series of internal steps and processes often requiring separate documentation. As a whole, these materials form the basis for our training and reference with regard to audio-video materials.
1. Determine a title to be produced.
- Review/screen recorded material (i.e., video tapes) and decide how they might be broken down into discrete titles. Each title will be its own video. Consult standardized guidelines for generating titles, including standardized phraseology, etc.
- Generating Titles & Credits for Recordings
2. Propose a title (and corresponding credits for each title) and have them checked by Germano.
- (Typically, it's best to prepare a batch of titles and their corresponding credits, and submit that to Germano, rather than submitting titles to him one-by-one.)
3. Send the approved titles and credits to Penam in Lhasa, or a local Tibetan assigned to the task like Tsering Wangchuk and Tsering Perlo to be rendered into Tibetan and Chinese.
4. Meanwhile digitize and edit your titles in Final Cut Pro, inserting blank title and credit slates whose trilingual information can be added later, once translations are ready.
5. Complete catalog entries in BOTH the physical media (i.e., tapes) database AND Audio-Video database.
- Physical Media Database: Make sure the content of the tape is properly described in the physical media database. Also include the recording date, the tape format (i.e., NTSC, PAL, HD, etc.), and other useful data about the tape itself and its recording.
- AV Database: Give a short description of the title’s content, fill out the relevant metadata (like language, etc.), propose collection classifications if not obvious, & record as much information as you can about participants involved in your title, under the "Credits" tab of each AVDB entry
- Consult with a native Tibetan speaker to help process participant information on handwritten forms as necessary. (Often such forms are filled out in the cursive script, not dbu can, and may therefore be harder to understand.)
6. Compress each title in Final Cut Pro, making sure you've included ending credits. Upload the files to the server after compression and after converting the audio files to MPEG-3 and generating thumbnails.
7. Alert a Transcription Center that the compression is ready for transcription, and eventual translation.
8. If relevant, once transcribed, it can be further processed for use in an instructional unit or other presentational context (see making language instructional units).
NOTE: If possible, use the fields under the workflow tab in order to mark processes as completed. In addition, you should keep track of the workflow in a more comprehensive fashion using the status reports for av, ie: titles waiting to be approved, completed titles, etc. In the future, we hope the new AV database will allow for tracking of workflow so that everyone involved can easily fnd what titles need to be translated, etc. by using the database itself.

Increased age, high blood cholesterol, high blood pressure and smoking are a few
of the risk factors related to heart disease, according to the American Heart Association.
You can modify, treat or control most risk factors to lower your risk by focusing
on your lifestyle habits or, if needed, taking medicine.
According to the American Heart Association, the major risk factors for coronary
heart disease are:
- Increased age: four out of five people who die of coronary heart disease are age
65 or older.
- Male gender: men have a greater risk of heart attach and they have attacks earlier
- Heredity: children of parents with heart disease are more likely to develop it
themselves. Heart disease risk is also higher among Americans with ancestry from
Africa or Mexico, native Americans, Hawaiians and Asians.
- Tobacco smoke: smoker's risk of heart attack is more than twice that of nonsmokers.
Second hand smoke increases the risk even for nonsmokers.
- High blood cholesterol: risk increases as blood cholesterol levels increase.
- High blood pressure: increases the heart's workload, causing the heart to
enlarge and weaken over time.
- Physical inactivity: regular, moderate-to-vigorous exercise is important in preventing
heart and blood vessel disease.
- Obesity and overweight: people with excess body fat are, especially in the waist
area, are more likely to develop heart disease, even if they have no other risk
- Diabetes mellitus: even when glucose levels are under control, diabetes greatly
increases the risk of heart disease and stroke.

What Are The Main Types Of Water Filter?
There are several different types of water filters available for use in the home and for other purposes. The type of water filter that you require depends on what you need to use it for.
Filtering ordinary tap water in the home for the purpose of improving the taste is a common practice. Chlorination and excess minerals can drastically change the taste and smell of tap water, but running the water through a filter can eliminate these substances and make the water taste much better.
If you are spending time in the outdoors doing some camping or backpacking, available water sources such as lakes and rivers can be dangerous or even deadly to drink. In this case a slightly more powerful type of water filtration would be needed. Other instances in which you might need to have a much more aggressive method of water filtration is when traveling in foreign countries or in the event of a major disaster such as a flood.
The charcoal based water filter is one of the most common of all types of water filter. This is the type of filter that you would find in a typical water filtration pitcher such as the Brita pitcher, and also in most types of on-the-faucet water filters. These types of water filter usually have a cartridge that contains a combination of charcoal and sand. When water is poured through the filter, the charcoal removes chlorine, chemicals and some other contaminants and the sand filters out any larger particles. The end result is clear looking and clean tasting water.
For filtration of outdoor water sources when camping and backpacking, a portable reverse osmosis system is one option. Reverse osmosis purifies water by passing it through a semi-permeable membrane, which traps nearly 100% of all contaminants, both chemical and biological. Since biological contaminants such as bacteria and viruses are a major threat in rivers and lakes, it is important to have a water filter that is able to safely remove them.
One disadvantage of reverse osmosis is that the process is extremely slow and wastes a lot of water. A reverse osmosis filter can also be a valuable part of any emergency supply kit, because contaminated water is a common hazard encountered in emergency situations. Because reverse osmosis is capable of even removing viruses from water, this type of filter can save lives in countries where there is an extreme shortage of safe drinking water.
Another one of the more popular types of water filter is the ceramic microfilter. Like a reverse osmosis system, a ceramic filtration system also uses an ultra-fine material to filter the water. In this case, porous ceramic is used as a filter. The ceramic is fine enough to trap even most bacteria and some types of virus, so they can successfully purify water in most parts of the world. Many ceramic-based water purifiers also incorporate charcoal and sand into the filters to improve taste while offering maximum filtration at the same time.
To read more about related subjects, please follow these links:
Boat Water Filters
Camping Water Filter
Emergency Water Filter
Garden Hose Water Filter
Hiking Water Filters
Outdoor Water Filters
Pond Water Filters
Pool Water Filters
Portable Water Filter
Salt Water Pool Filter
Water Bottle Filter
Well Water Filter Systems

HVAC Career Information
T he world outdoors is often an uncomfortable place. Weather changes can bring precipitation, blustery winds, and extreme temperatures. That's why we turn to the shelter of indoor spaces. We rely on climate-controlled environments to carry out our lives comfortably and effectively. But it takes much more than just a few walls, a roof, and insulation to make it all happen. So, what is HVAC?
What is HVAC and HVAC/R?
HVAC stands for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. The HVAC systems in our homes, offices, shopping malls, and other buildings allow us to live inside without too much concern for what's happening outside. But HVAC goes beyond the regulation of indoor temperatures. When such systems are properly installed and maintained, they contribute to better airflow and healthier indoor air quality, which is especially important for people with allergies, asthma, or other medical issues.
In addition to heating, ventilation, and air conditioning, there is another type of climate-control technology that is crucial to modern life. The "R" in HVAC/R stands for refrigeration. The storage and transport of perishable foods, medicines, and other items we may take for granted is made possible by today's commercial refrigeration systems. (Side note: Don't be confused by the different ways in which the "R" is added to HVAC. The subtle variations you might encounter—HVAC&R, HVAC/R, HVACR, HVAC-R, or HVAC R—all mean the same thing.)
Advances in HVAC technology are making the heating and cooling of new and retrofitted buildings more and more energy efficient. Refrigerants are being developed and used that are more environmentally friendly. And technologies such as hydronics (water-based heating), geothermal, and solar-powered heating and cooling are turning the HVAC profession into one with a growing number of "green" jobs.
HVAC systems are installed and serviced by HVAC technicians (who are sometimes known as HVAC mechanics or HVAC installers).
What Does an HVAC Technician Do?
The work of an HVAC technician can be rather varied. From installation to routine maintenance to repair, the many duties of a professional in the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning industry often add up to working days full of diverse activities. However, a lot depends on whether or not an HVAC technician chooses to specialize in working with a particular type of equipment (i.e., residential, light commercial, or commercial/industrial) in either the installation or service side of the business.
So, depending on their specialty, level of knowledge, and arsenal of skills, HVAC technicians carry out tasks that can include:
- Installing furnaces, heat pumps, and air conditioning units
- Installing the ductwork that carries treated air throughout a building
- Following blueprints and specifications used in the installation of HVAC systems, including air ducts, vents, pumps, water and fuel supply lines, and other components
- Connecting electrical wiring and controls
- Performing routine maintenance on a variety of HVAC equipment, such as checking for leaks, adjusting blowers and burners, and checking nozzles, thermostats, electrical circuits, controls, and other components
- Diagnosing and repairing problems that are found within any part of an HVAC system
- Adjusting the controls of an HVAC system and recommending appropriate settings
- Testing the performance of a furnace, heat pump, air conditioning unit or other piece of HVAC equipment to ensure that it operates at peak efficiency
- Using carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide testers to make sure that a customer's equipment operates safely
- Selling service contracts or replacement equipment to customers
HVAC/R technicians, sometimes known as refrigeration mechanics, install and service commercial or industrial refrigeration systems. In addition to some of the tasks above, HVAC/R technicians have duties that can include:
- Charging refrigeration systems with the proper refrigerant
- Conserving, recovering, and recycling refrigerants for reuse or ensuring that they are disposed of properly since their release can be very harmful to the environment
- Venting refrigerant into the appropriate cylinders
To perform their duties, HVAC and HVAC/R technicians use a large variety of special tools (sometimes numbering in the dozens) such as:
- Pressure gauges
- Acetylene torches
- Voltmeters, ohmmeters, and multimeters
- Combustion analyzers
- Soldering and brazing equipment
- Pipe cutters
- Gas detectors
- Micron gauges
- Tap and die sets
Where Can HVAC Technicians Work?
Whether they specialize in installing or servicing residential, commercial, or industrial equipment (or all three), HVAC technicians perform their work on-site in a wide variety of settings. Any building that utilizes climate-control equipment will see multiple visits by HVAC technicians over the course of its lifetime. Such buildings can include:
Most HVAC technicians work for independent service contractors. However, employment can also be found with:
- Direct-selling retail establishments (e.g., HVAC equipment dealers)
- Repair shops for commercial or industrial equipment and machinery
- Merchant wholesalers of heating equipment and supplies
What is the Typical Salary of an HVAC Technician?
The typical salary of an HVAC technician depends on many factors such as the type of HVAC job, employer location, level of experience, and whether or not a union is involved. When it comes to HVAC, salary is usually implemented in the form of hourly wages. Most HVAC technicians, regardless of their training, begin their careers at a relatively low rate of pay, but their wages rise gradually as they increase their skills, knowledge, and experience.
So, what are some average HVAC salaries? Based on national estimates, yearly wages for HVAC and HVAC/R technicians break down this way: *
- The bottom 10 percent earn $26,490 or less.
- Median wages (50th percentile) are $42,530.
- The top 10 percent earn $66,930 or more.
The pay scales of similar employers, even within the same city, can sometimes vary dramatically. HVAC/R technicians that install and service commercial or industrial systems generally get paid the most. Unionized employers also tend to have much higher wages than non-unionized ones. However, you can expect a large chunk of your wages from any union job to go toward paying for union fees, insurance, and other benefits.
Many HVAC technicians maximize their income by working longer hours during peak seasons (summer and/or winter). Additional wages can also come, in some cases, from earning commissions on the sale of new equipment or service contracts.
Are There Any Downsides to Working in the HVAC Trade?
For the people who turn it into a long-term career, HVAC is a lifestyle. Many HVAC technicians reap a great deal of personal satisfaction from their work. But, like any occupation, the field of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning has its upsides and downsides. It's not a career for everybody. You've got to be 100 percent committed in order to succeed.
Here are some of the possible drawbacks of being an HVAC or HVAC/R technician:
- Physical hazards—It can be grueling and hard on your body. Installing or servicing HVAC systems often requires heavy lifting, crouching, and kneeling—including in tight places like attics and crawl spaces. Other physical hazards also exist such as the potential for cuts, scrapes, electrical shock, burns, or muscle strain. And, although rare, working with refrigerants without appropriate safety equipment can result in injuries like frostbite, skin damage, or even blindness.
- Uncomfortable working conditions—It frequently involves working outdoors in bad weather or extreme temperatures (hot and cold).
- Mental fatigue—In addition to being physically demanding, HVAC work can also be mentally tiring. That's because you must remain alert and focused in order to solve problems and avoid injury or costly mistakes. Plus, no matter how experienced you are, there is always a lot to learn. HVAC technology changes quickly, so being an HVAC technician requires staying on top of the latest developments and adding that knowledge to what you've already learned about older systems that are still in use. That makes the job sometimes feel overwhelming. As HVAC technology improves, much of it is also becoming more and more technically challenging to work on.
- Fluctuating work hours—Employment in the HVAC trade can sometimes be subject to seasonal fluctuations, particularly for technicians without much experience. It is common for many HVAC service technicians to work very long hours during peak seasons (summer and winter) followed by a reduction in hours (often less than full time) during the slower seasons. The peak seasons can be extra difficult if you have a family since working overtime and being on call at all hours (including weekends) can mean you're not able to spend as much quality time with those you care about. On the other hand, slow weeks are also inevitable, so you have to know how to account for the ups and downs in your personal finances.
- Irritable customers—Since many service calls happen when customers are in distress over failing heating or cooling equipment during extreme weather, HVAC technicians sometimes must deal directly with people who are cranky and impatient. Tempers are heightened when a problem can't be fixed right away because a part needs to be ordered.
- Delayed gratification—It takes time—usually at least five years—to develop the skills that enable you to begin making what are considered good wages in the HVAC industry. As a new technician, you should expect the starting pay to be lower than what you might be hoping for. You have to be willing to stick it out and learn everything you can in the meantime.
What are the Good Things About Working in HVAC?
The downsides of being an HVAC technician are balanced—and some might even say overcome—by the many positive attributes of the HVAC trade. Here are a few of them:
- A sense of accomplishment—It can be intensely rewarding to fix problematic equipment or install new systems since it means that your hard work directly impacts the ability of people to feel comfortable in their environments. You have the chance to make someone's day if they were freezing (or sweating) prior to your arrival. Plus, looking back on a job well done often leads to a great feeling of personal satisfaction, regardless of how difficult it might have been.
- Built-in exercise for mind and body—Despite the occupational hazards, being an HVAC technician can help you stay in shape—physically and mentally.
- Variety—Every day is bound to be somewhat different. You won't be stuck in an office. Instead, you'll get to solve a variety of problems and meet new people. And the fast pace of busy times helps the work days pass quickly.
- Pride—Because HVAC technicians can impact the well-being of people and the environment, they often feel a great sense of personal responsibility and pride of purpose.
- Stimulation—Opportunities for learning something new happen on a frequent basis, which means boredom is rare. As the HVAC industry moves closer and closer toward full computer automation for heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems, the chance to develop advanced skills and knowledge also increases.
- Long-term stability—Once you've established yourself in the trade, there is great potential for making good money. And the job security can also be good. This is particularly true when you consider that HVAC skills are portable, and the work must be performed on location, which means that HVAC jobs are not subject to foreign outsourcing.
What Personal Characteristics Do I Need for an HVAC Career?
People who succeed as HVAC technicians possess key traits that enable them to handle the challenges of the occupation while taking advantage of the benefits. It's important to keep in mind that those who find long-term success and satisfaction in the HVAC trade generally possess the following characteristics:
- A strong desire to help other people
- A sense of craftsmanship and pride in their work (no cutting corners)
- Physical and mental toughness
- A courteous and respectful attitude
- Pride in their appearance
- An aptitude for mechanical, hands-on work
- Strong interpersonal skills
- Common sense
- The ability and willingness to learn
- Determination and a strong work ethic
- An interest in the science behind HVAC technology
- Good problem-solving abilities
How Do You Become an HVAC Technician?
There is more than one path to establishing a career in heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. When asking, "How do you become an HVAC technician?" it is important to consider that there are essentially four different ways to begin going about it:
- Obtaining formal HVAC training from a high school program or post-secondary school
- Entering a formal apprenticeship program for your training
- Joining the Armed Forces and receiving military HVAC training
- Pursuing an entry-level HVAC position without any formal training and hoping that you find an employer willing to teach you everything informally on the job (an increasingly rare circumstance)
Each option has its advantages and disadvantages. However, most employers generally consider formal training a must before they will even consider you for an open position.
Here are some things to consider about post-secondary training at an HVAC school:
- Most HVAC training programs at technical and trade schools take between six months and two years to complete.
- Programs that last a year or less generally award a diploma or certificate of completion. Those that last two years usually award an associate's degree.
- Shorter certificate or diploma programs are often designed only to teach students the basics of one of the three main areas of HVAC/R: (1) residential heating and air conditioning, (2) light commercial heating and air conditioning, or (3) commercial refrigeration.
- Most well-respected HVAC training schools offer programs that are accredited by at least one of the following agencies: HVAC Excellence, the National Center for Construction Education and Research (NCCER), or the Partnership for Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Accreditation (PAHRA).
- Taking the right courses in high school can help you better prepare for HVAC school. These include subjects such as mechanical drawing, basic electronics, math, computer science, and applied physics and chemistry. It can also be beneficial to gain some basic knowledge of electrical and plumbing work.
- HVAC schools are designed to give you a head start in the acquisition of your skills, but it will likely take a few years of working experience as an assistant HVAC technician after you graduate before anyone will begin to think of you as proficient.
Another popular and advantageous way to receive formal training is through an apprenticeship. Here is what you should know about HVAC apprenticeships:
- In general, apprenticeship opportunities pop up only periodically depending on the needs of employers, both unionized and non-unionized.
- Apprenticeships are often a pathway to national certification in the HVAC industry, and they can even allow you to earn college credits.
- In order to reap all of the benefits of a formal HVAC apprenticeship, you'll want to find an apprenticeship program that is registered with the Office of Apprenticeship, which is part of the U.S. Department of Labor's Employment and Training Administration.
- Most apprenticeships allow you to earn a wage while you learn. And, if you are part of a registered apprenticeship program, your paycheck is guaranteed to increase over time. Unionized apprenticeships offer the additional advantages of working under the protection of a union contract and, usually, receiving insurance and pension benefits.
- Apprenticeships usually last four to five years, and they include both classroom instruction and hands-on training on the job. After completing a five-year registered apprenticeship, you can become a journeyman in the HVAC field.
- The organizations with the most HVAC apprenticeship opportunities include, in no particular order: (1) Air-Conditioning Contractors of America (ACCA), (2) Mechanical Contractors of America (MCAA), (3) Plumbing-Heating-Cooling Contractors (PHCC), (4) Sheet Metal Workers' International Association (SMWIA), (5) Associated Builders and Contractors (ABC), and (6) United Association of Journeymen and Apprentices of the Plumbing and Pipe Fitting Industry of the United States and Canada (UA).
- Apprenticeship openings are often highly competitive. Plus, you must meet the minimum requirements of whatever apprenticeship program you are applying for. Organizations that offer or coordinate apprenticeships in HVAC often look for candidates that have at least a high school diploma (or equivalent), good math and reading skills, above-average manual dexterity and hand-eye coordination, strong mechanical aptitude, patience, dependability, the ability to get along well with other people, and a desire to do whatever it takes to learn the trade. As part of the application process, you may also be required to take aptitude tests and attend multiple interviews.
- Completing an HVAC program at a technical college or trade school can sometimes give you a leg up on the competition when applying for a registered apprenticeship.
Regardless of how you get your HVAC training, there are a number of other things to keep in mind about the HVAC trade and finding work in it. Consider the following points:
- Many employers look for HVAC professionals with at least two to five years of on-the-job experience. Schooling alone, while beneficial, is often not enough—particularly for openings at larger companies.
- In order to break into the trade and get the experience you need, you might have to spend a few years working for a smaller HVAC company at a lower wage than you might be expecting. The more you are willing to swallow your pride and do whatever is necessary to gain experience, the more opportunities you will have at the beginning of your career.
- In many regions, you are more likely to land your first HVAC job during a peak season (summer or winter) since that is when demand for HVAC workers increases.
- Employers want workers who will stick around for the long haul. That's why many of them prefer to hire people who've completed a formal HVAC program. Completing an HVAC education is a sign that you aren't just looking for a temporary job but, rather, have put your heart into making HVAC your career.
- As you seek to gain experience early in your career, it's best to go for variety, if possible, in the type of HVAC work you do. Some people in the trade get "stuck" in just one particular area (such as installation) and find it difficult later on if they wish to move into a different HVAC specialty that they might enjoy better.
- It pays to be assertive and proactive, especially when it comes to increasing your HVAC knowledge. You'll have better job security and advancement opportunities if you can become the "go-to" person for technical information and troubleshooting know-how about the equipment your employer sells and services. As you begin your career, it is essential to ask a lot of questions, pay close attention, and study, study, study. And, as you continue your career, the need to learn never stops. There will always be more to know.
- Like in any other trade, the better you are at your job, the more quickly you can climb the HVAC career ladder.
- It is impossible to learn everything you need to know in two years or less. So, although trade school can give you a great head start on the fundamentals, you should expect to begin your HVAC career in a "helper" or apprentice role as you continue to learn. It generally takes at least five years of on-the-job experience before you're ready to work on your own.
- Since demand for HVAC technicians can sometimes be prone to seasonal fluctuations, it is important to learn how to manage your money in a way that allows you to ride out any downtimes comfortably.
- Long-term success as an HVAC technician hinges a great deal upon your reputation. So it's important to develop a courteous and respectful attitude early on, to never cut corners, and to let the quality of work you perform speak for itself.
- Persistence and enthusiasm are the biggest keys to landing your first job in HVAC. Employers look for people who are willing to commit to hard work. You can improve your chances of finding employment by always acting polite and professional, following up repeatedly with the people in charge of hiring, and demonstrating to them that you're not an arrogant "know-it-all" but are, instead, humble and ready to learn and take on all of the challenges inherent to HVAC work.
How Do You Get HVAC Certification?
When asking, "How do you get HVAC certification?" it is essential to understand that some certifications are required while most others are voluntary. Even voluntary certifications, however, can help you advance in your HVAC career since most employers like to see official acknowledgment of your competencies.
But knowing how to obtain HVAC certification is just one aspect of this issue. You also need to understand what it all means. Here are the most important things to remember:
- Regardless of which area of HVAC/R you choose to work in, you will be required to obtain at least one type of certification from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Section 608 of the Clean Air Act of 1990 requires anyone who services equipment that uses specific refrigerants to take a test to prove that they know how to properly handle, recycle, and dispose of materials that can damage the ozone layer.
- EPA Section 608 certification is broken down into four types depending on the kind of equipment you will be working with: (1) Type I for small appliances, (2) Type II for very high-pressure appliances, (3) Type III for low-pressure appliances, and (4) Universal for all types of HVAC/R equipment.
- HVAC students enrolled in formal training are often required to take the EPA Section 608 Universal certification test as part of their program.
- Although not required by the EPA, R-410A certification covers an especially dangerous type of refrigerant in greater detail than what is found in the EPA Section 608 test. R-410A refrigerant is used at a much higher vapor pressure than other refrigerants and, therefore, requires different tools, equipment, and safety standards. R-410A is increasingly replacing some of the older ozone-damaging refrigerants that are being phased out.
- Other types of professional HVAC certifications are designed to verify the real-world skills and working knowledge of HVAC and HVAC/R technicians who've had at least a year or two of on-the-job experience. Certification is offered by independent organizations in many different specialty areas such as residential and commercial air conditioning, heat pump service and installation, gas heat, electric heat, oil furnaces, hydronics, air distribution, and commercial refrigeration.
- The two most recognized providers of professional-level certifications in the American HVAC/R industry are (1) HVAC Excellence and (2) North American Technician Excellence (NATE). Obtaining certification from these organizations involves meeting any necessary prerequisites and then passing written exams. You can also obtain your EPA Section 608 certification through such providers.
- A certificate of completion (or diploma) from a formal HVAC training school is NOT the same thing as professional-level certification from organizations like HVAC Excellence or NATE.
How Long Do HVAC Classes Take?
Formal HVAC programs at technical colleges and trade schools vary in length. A lot depends on the type of credential you're after and how in-depth you want your schooling to be. So, how long do HVAC classes take?
HVAC programs that award certificates or diplomas typically last one year or less. Some take as little as about 18 weeks to complete. With these shorter programs, you often must choose to study just one of three specific areas: (1) light commercial air conditioning and heating, (2) residential air conditioning and heating, or (3) commercial refrigeration.
Associate degree programs in HVAC/R technology, on the other hand, are designed to last two years and are often more comprehensive.
How Much Does HVAC School Cost?
The cost of HVAC schooling varies significantly depending on where you go to school and whether you choose to pursue a certificate or associate degree. So, how much does HVAC school cost?
Basic program costs, including tuition, can range from as little as $2,000 or less to as much as $35,000 or more. The more expensive programs sometimes have a wider range of HVAC equipment and tools in their labs for better hands-on learning, although it is best to tour any school you are considering and check out their facilities to make sure you'll be getting good value for your money. Books and supplies are sometimes an extra expense and can cost as much as $4,500 depending on the program.
Financial aid in the form of loans and grants are frequently available from the federal government for those who qualify. And some states offer financial assistance through their own retraining programs for unemployed workers.
What Can I Expect to Learn in My HVAC Training?
HVAC schools are set up to teach the fundamentals of what you need to know to begin working as an HVAC technician at the entry level. Ultimately, HVAC involves learning at least the basics of about five different trades competently, including electrical work, plumbing, welding, pipefitting, and sheet metal.
HVAC education programs vary in their curriculum, but the ones that are accredited by an industry-recognized organization generally share a number of common elements. Three of the biggest accrediting bodies for HVAC training are (1) HVAC Excellence, (2) the Partnership for Air-Conditioning, Heating, and Refrigeration Accreditation, and (3) the National Center for Construction Education and Research.
Most HVAC programs combine classroom study with hands-on training. Depending on the school and program you choose, you can expect the curriculum to include subjects such as:
- Electric, gas, and oil heat
- Residential and light commercial air conditioning
- Heat pumps
- Basic electronics
- Soldering and brazing
- Venting and duct systems
- Interpreting mechanical drawings and diagrams
- Components of HVAC systems
- General HVAC theory
- Airflow and indoor air quality
- Heating fuels
- Refrigerant types and refrigerant oils
- Installation and service
- Troubleshooting and problem solving
- Building codes and requirements
- Tools and test instruments
- Safety precautions and practices
Many accredited HVAC/R programs use the Industry Competency Exam (ICE) as an exit exam for students. So, depending on the program you choose, you might have to take one or more of the three different tests that are available as part of the ICE. The different testing areas are: (1) residential air conditioning and heating, (2) light commercial air conditioning and heating, and (3) commercial refrigeration.
As an HVAC Technician, Will I Need to Be Licensed?
The answer depends on where you intend to work. Licensing requirements for HVAC technicians vary greatly depending on the state or locality they work in and whether they intend to be their own boss. And some states don't have any legal requirements. In the ones that do, however, a state exam often must be passed. Plus, some states require you to have completed the equivalent of an apprenticeship program or two to five years of on-the-job HVAC experience before you can apply for a license to legally work on your own.
The content of state licensing exams also varies significantly. In some states, for example, emphasis might be placed on having an extensive knowledge of electrical codes, but, in other states, the focus might be more on HVAC-specific knowledge.
Just remember: Although your state might not require you to obtain an official license in order to perform HVAC work, the federal government will still require you to be certified in the proper handling of refrigerants. The EPA Section 608 certification exam is a written test and is administered by a variety of organizations that have been approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, including unions, building groups, trade schools, and contractor associations.
How Promising is the HVAC Job Outlook?
The HVAC job outlook is expected to be excellent for the foreseeable future. In America, employment of HVAC technicians is projected to increase by 28 percent between 2008 and 2018, which is much faster than average. **
The growing demand for HVAC and HVAC/R technicians can be attributed to a number of factors. As the nation's population grows, so does the number of buildings (residential, commercial, and industrial) that need to be fitted with climate-control systems. And the increasing complexity of new HVAC systems means an increasing possibility of their malfunction and need for servicing, which then requires skilled technicians. In addition, the growing focus on reducing energy consumption and improving indoor air quality means that more HVAC technicians are needed for analyzing the efficiency of existing systems and replacing old polluting ones with new, more efficient models.
Although experienced HVAC technicians can expect excellent job prospects, the odds of new techs landing employment are best for those who have had training through a formal apprenticeship program, through an accredited program from an HVAC school, or both. You can also increase your chances of landing a good job by becoming an expert at increasing energy efficiency and gaining a solid understanding of complex computer-controlled HVAC systems such as those found in modern high-rises.
What Kind of Advancement Opportunities Exist in the Heating, Ventilation,
and Air Conditioning (HVAC) Industry?
The HVAC industry is incredibly diverse. Most HVAC technicians begin their careers in the residential and light commercial sectors of the field. Advancement usually comes in the form of higher wages or supervisory positions. But, with advanced knowledge, a lot of experience, and the right mindset, new opportunities can arise for entering other areas of the industry, which offer new challenges.
Commercial refrigeration, for instance, is an area of high demand that requires workers with a lot of patience and specialized skills. With the right training and education, HVAC/R technicians can also specialize in areas such as solar-powered or geothermal heating and cooling, retrofitting, system testing and balancing, efficiency evaluations, or building operations with advanced computer controls. In addition, some technicians move into teaching, HVAC sales and marketing, or managing their own contracting businesses.
It is even possible to earn a bachelor's degree in HVAC engineering technology. Such a degree could allow you to become an HVAC engineer or HVAC technologist and design new systems and controls for the manufacturing, commercial, institutional, or industrial sectors.
How Do I Get Started?
One of the best ways to discover whether HVAC might be a good field for you is to talk with a few experienced HVAC technicians. See if you can schedule a time to ride along with them on some service or installation calls. Or, if you're ready to get moving now, then check out our list of HVAC schools. You could soon have the repeated, satisfying experience of standing back and admiring a job well done.

Zones: 3 to 8
Mature Height: 75 feet
Mature Spread: 40 feet
This is an outstanding tree for fall color. The yellow leaves glow against the black bark. Cherry-like, dark brown-red, non-peeling bark with dark glossy green leaves. This tree has a narrow, upright habit. It is native to the eastern United States. The bark and leaves of the sweet birch are sweet and aromatic, and the stems taste and smell like wintergreen. Also known as the Black Birch or Cherry Birch.
When choosing a location, keep in mind that the Sweet Birch has a fast growth rate. It grows up to 75 feet in height and 40 feet in spread. It can be planted in zones 3 to 8. This birch will need additional water during dry periods. An acid, moist soil is preferred.
How To Start These Seeds:
Scarification: Soak in water, let stand in water for 24 hours
Stratification: Cold stratify for 30 days
Germination: Requires light for germination, surface sow and keep moist
Other: Natural fall sowing in mulched beds
Seed Count Per Packet:
This packet contains 80 hand-sorted, high-quality seeds.
If refrigerated upon receipt, these seeds can be stored for up to a year before you decide to use them.

As the Fukushima world disaster continues to unfold, we have learned that the strontium levels are 240 times over the legal limit near the plant, which has become an uninhabitable land area. The nuclear waste advisor to the Japanese government recently explained that roughly 966 square kilometers (km), or 600 square miles, around Fukushima are now uninhabitable due to the unfolding disaster. This massive dead zone area is equivalent in size to 17 Manhattan Islands placed next to one another. Unfortunately, the latest readings taken approximately 20 miles out to sea from the site showed radioisotope levels from all the radioactive particles were ten times higher than those measured in the Baltic and Black Seas after the massive Chernobyl disaster.
"Given that the Fukushima plant is on the ocean, and with leaks and runoff directly to the ocean, the impacts on the ocean will exceed those of Chernobyl, which was hundreds of miles from any sea," said Ken Buessler, Senior Scientist in Marine Chemistry at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts, several months back. It has also been revealed that reactors 1, 2, and 3 have all experienced "melt-throughs." This means the radiation materials have burnt through and gone directly into the ground and water. This is considered to be the worst possible scenario in a disaster of this nature.
"Dangerous levels of radioactive iodine and cesium have already contaminated the sea, the soil, groundwater, and the air," said reporter Mark Willacy of the Australian Broadcast Corporation in a recent Lateline interview. "This week plutonium was detected for the first time outside the stricken plant, and Strontium-90, known as a ‘ seeker’ , because it can cause bone cancer and leukemia, has now been found as far away as 60 kilometers (37+ miles) from the facility."
Various atomic experts now agree that the unfolding situation is truly "as serious as it gets in a nuclear disaster." Fukushima presently has 20 nuclear cores exposed, and it has 20 times the potential of Chernobyl to be released. This is without a doubt the worst nuclear disaster the world has ever seen.
"We are discovering hot particles everywhere in Japan," said Arnold Gundersen, a former industry senior vice president with 39 years of nuclear engineering experience.
The average number of infant deaths caused by the Fukushima radiation exposure multiple meltdown was 37 deaths in 4 weeks (an average of 9.25 per week), ending March 19th (prior to the disaster) and after 10 weeks, ending May 28th (post disaster), the number of deaths was 125 (an average of 12.60 per week). This is a 35% increase of perinatal mortality in infants under a year old, in 8 cities in the Northwest (Boise, Seattle, Portland, Santa Cruz, Sacramento, San Francisco, San Jose, and Berkeley). According to Joseph Mangano, Epidemiologist and Executive Director of Radiation & Public Health Project, the perinatal mortality rate in Philadelphia rose 48% 10 weeks after the meltdown.
The bad news, of course, is that this is an ongoing disaster, and the governments, for whatever unexplained reasons, don’ t seem interested in sealing it off. Even though this ongoing radiation exposure and disaster is not being noted in the newspapers, and one cannot see it, smell it or detect it easily, it is still there and getting worse.
Evidence of the ongoing danger of U.S. nuclear plants is the report by the Associated Press citing 48 out of 65 of the facilities reported leaking tritium, a radioactive form of hydrogen. In other words, 75% of U.S. nuclear plants are leaking. It is confirmatory to hear that the U.S. commission blames many of the leaks on corroded buried piping. The significance of the leaking is that in 37 of the 48 sites, there was found to be contamination of the ground water that exceeded the federal drinking water standard. The good news is that no public water supplies are known to be contaminated, but it was found in private wells in Illinois and Minnesota. In New Jersey, tritium was found in a discharge canal feeding Barnegat Bay. This is not a recent phenomenon. In 2007 cesium-137 was found, along with tritium, at the Fort Calhoun plant near Omaha, Nebraska, and strontium-90 was found near New York City and the Indian Point nuclear site. All this just supports how important it is not only protect yourself against all forms of radiation with our supplement program, but also to attempt to create some reforms to protect the American public.
The threat that nuclear power poses to our nation is alarming, as our government recklessly moves to re-license old reactors and use tax dollars to help finance new plants. Even more frightening is the lack of evacuation plans for more than 111 million Americans who live within 50 miles of a reactor. Unfortunately, the U.S. government isn’t learning the critical lessons from these nuclear energy disasters. Incredibly, our nation’ s evacuation plans only include areas within 10 miles of reactors—despite clear evidence from Chernobyl and Fukushima that serious radiation impacts extend much further. And our emergency medical capacities fall short of what’ s needed to meet a major nuclear catastrophe. These dangerously inadequate emergency response plans put major U.S. urban areas at risk—including New York City, Chicago, Boston, Los Angeles, and Washington D.C.
The significance of this censored news further supports the unsustainability and dangers of nuclear plants in the U.S. compounded by lax federal regulation. This is a dangerous situation that unfortunately is just waiting to happen. I suggest for the protection of our family, children, and the U.S. population that we exert every possible effort to follow the German example of making a commitment to dismantle all nuclear reactors by 2020 and certainly not to build new ones. That is the least we can do to put common sense and values of human safety above the interests of economic investment and profit of the nuclear industry. This dangerous nonsense is only going to be stopped if enough people complain. I urge you to support all the anti-nuclear groups nationally and locally, such as Environmental Defense Fund, Greenpeace, Friends of the Earth, Physicians’ Committee for Responsible Medicine, etc. Your active support on local and national levels can help to:
- End loan guarantees for new reactors and implement a nationwide moratorium on new reactor licensing and design certification;
- Suspend operations at reactors similar to those at Fukushima—as well as those on geological fault lines—and reject renewed licensing for existing reactors until all of the lessons of the current crisis are fully understood; and
- Deal with the dangerous radioactive waste by upgrading spent fuel pools and hardening onsite fuel storage for all operating reactors.
Blessings to your health and radiant wellbeing,
Gabriel Cousens, M.D.

Now a team of University of Washington and Battelle scientists have identified metabolites in urine that could potentially predict young children at risk of developing autism.
The varying degrees and manifestations of this developmental brain condition are collectively called autistic spectrum disorder. ASD is characterized by impaired social interactions, difficulty in communicating, and repetitive behaviors. Many other symptoms also can be present, including anxiety, depression, learning disabilities, sleep disorders, and gastrointestinal problems.
Currently, diagnosing a child with ASD requires a thorough evaluation by a team of health professionals from a wide range of specialties. Early intervention often can reduce or prevent the more severe symptoms and disabilities associated with ASD.
Autism specialists and many other people look forward to a day when a test for a biological marker might detect autism risk in young children. To this end, Seattle researchers evaluated porphyrins in the urine of children to determine if the levels of these metabolites could predict ASD.
The research team included James Woods, professor of environmental and occupational health sciences at the UW School of Public Health, and Nicholas Heyer and Diana Echeverria, senior scientists at Battelle Centers for Public Health Research and Evaluation
While porphyrins are found in everyone’s urine, the research team observed that certain kinds of these metabolic byproducts are much higher in the urine of some children with autism, compared with typically developing, non-autisitic children of the same age.
Additionally, when children with autism were randomly compared with typically developing children or children with other developmental disorders, the porphyrin biomarkers correctly identified more than thirty percent of autistic children without incorrectly identifying a single non-autistic child.
The ability to detect porphyrins in a urine sample opens new clinical possibilities. Simple urine tests, if they prove effective, could become a rapid, low-cost, widely available way to screen young children for this type of autism risk.
“The significance of this biomarker is not only that it may facilitate earlier detection of autism risk,” said Woods, “but also that it might help identify those ASD children whose symptoms are specifically associated with altered porphyrin metabolism.”
He added, “When validated in a larger study, this biomarker could help to identify a specific subset of ASD kids and improve the search for more focused treatment options for these children.”
The findings were published in this month’s edition of Autism Research to coincide with Autism Awareness Month. The paper can be found online.
Partial funding for this research was provided by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. Additional funding was provided by the Autism Research Institute and the Wallace Research Foundation.
Source: University of Washington

Inflammation is a necessary component of the immune system’s fight against infections and the repair of damaged tissues—but problems can arise if the fire won’t subside.
Asthma, cancer, diabetes, Alzheimer’s disease, and even depression have been linked to a constant activation of the inflammatory response. It’s not an easy condition to treat, either, because its causes include obesity, stress, and pollution, among others. As a result, Wendy Demark-Wahnefried, Ph.D., the Webb Endowed Chair of Nutrition Sciences, and many other UAB researchers are investigating ways to control inflammation on an individual basis.
They’re not the only ones searching for a solution. Several high-profile celebrities have been touting “anti-inflammatory” diets as a cure. These diets call for eating lots of fruits and vegetables, decreasing consumption of processed carbohydrates, replacing fats and proteins containing omega-6 with their omega-3 counterparts such as fish, and using olive oil instead of other oils.
Logic and Loss
It’s logical: If inflammation causes certain diseases, then eating foods that combat inflammation should prevent those diseases. But according to Demark-Wahnefried, these popular “anti-inflammatory” diets are missing one critical factor: weight control. “We know adipose tissue (body fat) has a great deal to do with inflammation,” she says. “It produces all kinds of cytokines and adipokines, which are signaling molecules that can drive inflammation.”
“It’s all spin,” says Demark-Wahnefried. “What they seem to be preaching is pretty much mainstream. They’ve just repackaged it.”
The bright side is that changes in eating habits can lead to weight loss, producing health benefits. Even a 7 percent reduction in body weight substantially diminishes the risk of diseases like diabetes and cancer, Demark-Wahnefried says. This doesn’t necessarily depend on the diet used, though. She points out that even the Atkins diet—the antithesis of an “anti-inflammatory” diet—can lead to some clinical health benefits if it results in weight loss.
As for antioxidant supplements, studies suggest that there is no shortcut. Just adding an antioxidant supplement or two will not overcome all the inflammatory effects of the traditional Southern biscuits-and-gravy diet, for example. In fact, when it comes to research on isolated supplements, “we’ve really bombed out at being able to predict what the benefit will be,” says Demark-Wahnefried. “The more you separate the antioxidants from the whole food, the more danger you have of not having the right isoform or the appropriate mix. You lose a lot of the benefit of the whole food when you have that reductionist mentality.”
So, to reduce chronic inflammation, Demark-Wahnefried recommends losing the extra pounds to reduce adipose stores, then following up with an overall healthier diet. She suggests consuming more fruits and vegetables and replacing unhealthy proteins with those rich in omega-3 fatty acids, such as fish. Sounds a lot like an “anti-inflammatory” diet, right? “It’s all spin,” she says. “What they seem to be preaching is pretty much mainstream. They’ve just repackaged it.”
A Primer on Produce
Fresh fruits and vegetables are best for nutritional value—“as long as they’re fresh,” Demark-Wahnefried notes. She explains that many fruits and vegetables sold in grocery stores are picked before their nutrients are at peak capacity, and more nutrients are lost during the long transit. In other words, buy local if possible.
Canned fruits and vegetables can provide some nutrients, too, but the heat of the canning process can destroy some, which are known as heat-labile nutrients. “A lot of B vitamins go up in smoke, and vitamin C and anything that is water-soluble is diminished,” Demark-Wahnefried says. Heat-labile nutrients are also lost in dried fruits, but the soluble fiber (especially good for cholesterol levels) and many nutrients like magnesium and iron are maintained. One caveat: Dried fruit tastes good, so you’re likely to eat more. “It’s a substantial calorie load,” she warns.
As for cooking, “there’s a certain wisdom to eating things raw; you don’t destroy the nutrients that are heat-labile,” Demark-Wahnefried explains. “But by the same token, there are some substances in food that, when you cook them, actually have a better benefit for you.” She recommends cooking vegetables in the microwave, which introduces the least amount of vitamin-leeching water and often requires a shorter cooking time. No matter how vegetables are prepared, she doesn’t recommend overcooking them or adding lots of saturated fats.
Still, we may not have to eliminate the biscuits and gravy completely. Demark-Wahnefried considers moderation essential. “Let’s face it. Everyone eats some foods that are unhealthy,” she says. “Everything’s a balance.”
—Written by Erin Thacker

1 October 2009
A picnic basket linked to Agatha Christie, soil samples collected before the Channel Tunnel was built and a radioactive rock used in a Nobel Prize-winning experiment feature in a provocative new exhibition at UCL.
Disposal?, which opens on Monday 19 October 2009, invites you to comment on the most challenging question faced by museums today: What should we collect and hold on to and what should we get rid of?
The exhibition includes objects which would not normally be on display, such as a crusher which can apply the weight of 150 hippos, a collection of plastic dinosaurs and slides containing microscopic fossils.
Among these are five objects earmarked for disposal that the public can vote on. This is one of several ways in which people can contribute their views on the collections: on what they think is important, what should be collected and what they feel would be better off elsewhere.
Featured pieces will include:
- A picnic basket belonging to Agatha Christie’s husband’s second wife Barbara Parker. The husband, Max Mallowan, was a famous archaeologist. Parker donated the hamper and its contents to UCL. The contents included Minoan pottery, a key, a doorknob, beads and a copy of The Times.
- Soil samples collected before the building of the Channel Tunnel. Archaeologists take such samples to see if a site contains archaeological material. These samples were stored at UCL soon after they were taken, but have never been analysed.
- A radioactive mineral sample which emits alpha particles, but which is historically important. William Ramsay (1852–1916), a former head of UCL Chemistry, used it to discover helium in one of a series of Nobel Prize-winning experiments.
The exhibition will also host two events:
- ‘Fight at the Museum: Rescue My Object!’ on Tuesday 20 October, 6.30pm – 9pm, will see experts battle to convince an audience to save their favourite object housed in different collections at UCL.
- ‘Treasured? Hunt’ on Wednesday 28 October, 6pm – 9pm, will invite people to seek out intriguing objects and specimens in store and decide for themselves just how treasured objects should be.
Disposing of objects by museums is controversial, conjuring up emotive images of collections thrown into skips or valuable artworks lost to the nation through private sales. With ever-decreasing resources and ever-expanding collections, museums are under serious pressure. Collections are fast becoming unsustainable – ethical but tough decision-making is essential to museums’ survival.
In a research-led university such as UCL, collections have to keep pace with cutting-edge innovations and new discoveries. While active collecting always goes on, responsible and regular disposal is essential for collections to stay manageable.
Subhadra Das, UCL Collections Reviewer, says: “UCL Museums & Collections hold thousands of fascinating and historically important objects which are used for teaching and research. Like all museums, they also contain objects whose roles and use are unclear or problematic. Some objects may no longer be useful, some are too big or have become damaged and some should never have been collected. In the past such things have sometimes been disposed of thoughtlessly – by putting them in the skip. This exhibition is about thoughtful disposal.”
The exhibition runs from Monday 19 October to Saturday 31 October 2009, is open to the public and is free of charge. Opening hours are Monday-Friday 10am-7pm, Saturday 10am-6pm. The exhibition is in the Chadwick Building, UCL, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT.
Media contact: Jenny Gimpel
Image: A hippopotamus skull

A simple, inexpensive method for preventing type 2 diabetes that relies on calling people and educating them on the sort of lifestyle changes they could make to avoid developing the disease has proven effective in a study conducted by researchers at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) and the City of Berkeley Department of Public Health.
The study involved 230 people in poor, urban neighborhoods in the San Francisco Bay Area cities of Richmond, Oakland and Berkeley. Contacted by phone about once a month, half of them received specific dietary guidance and other lifestyle counseling. After six months, those who had received the counseling had on average lost more weight, were consuming less fat, were eating more fruits and vegetables and showed more improvements in lowering in their blood triglycerides, a key risk measure for type 2 diabetes.
Described this week in the American Journal of Public Health, the new intervention is specifically designed for urban, poor, and predominantly minority communities. It addresses the need for diabetes prevention interventions in these communities and highlights a simple fact that doctors at UCSF and elsewhere have been repeating for years — that type 2 diabetes is preventable in the first place.
“Diabetes is not something you are necessarily going to get just because it runs in your family,” said Alka Kanaya, MD, an associate professor of medicine at UCSF and one of two senior authors on the study. “It is very preventable, and lifestyle changes can really impact the onset of diabetes.”
“You can do something about it,” said Anita Stewart, PhD, a professor at the UCSF Institute for Health & Aging and the Center for Aging in Diverse Communities who is the other senior author on the paper.
How Lifestyle Changes Can Prevent Diabetes
Diabetes is a chronic and complex disease marked by high levels of sugar in the blood that arise due to problems with the hormone insulin, which regulates blood sugar levels. It is usually caused by an inability to produce insulin (type 1) or an inability to respond correctly to insulin (type 2).
A major health concern in the United States, diabetes of all types affect an estimated 8.3 percent of the U.S. population — some 25.8 million Americans — and cost U.S. taxpayers more than $200 billion annually.
In California alone, an estimated 4 million people (one out of every seven adults) have type 2 diabetes and millions more are at risk of developing it. These numbers are poised to explode in the next half century if more is not done to prevent diabetes.
Previous studies have shown that counseling and other lifestyle interventions are effective at preventing type 2 diabetes, but those interventions have generally been designed for clinical settings and include separate sessions with numerous health professionals. This makes them expensive and difficult to scale to large urban populations where diabetes interventions are needed the most.
Many of this country’s urban poor face thin health insurance coverage, low literacy, and low income, and a higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes. These disparities were apparent in the UCSF study. About half of the study population was composed of immigrants, and nearly a quarter had no health insurance. Almost a third said they faced financial hardship, and 22 percent had less than a high-school education.
By focusing on a phone-based solution delivered by the Public Health department staff, the UCSF researchers designed their new intervention specifically as a low-cost community-based approach that would be relevant to poor, minority and low-literacy populations. Similar telephone interventions have been used to reach out broadly to populations in San Francisco and in other cities to spread lifestyle messages related to hypertension, smoking, high cholesterol and other issues.
“This adds to our public health toolkit of ways to do outreach and prevent diabetes,” said Kanaya.
The article, “The Live Well, Be Well Study: A Community-Based, Translational Lifestyle Program to Lower Diabetes Risk Factors in Ethnic Minority and Lower–Socioeconomic Status Adults” by Alka M. Kanaya, Jasmine Santoyo-Olsson, Steven Gregorich, Melanie Grossman, Tanya Moore and Anita L. Stewart appears in the June 14, 2012 issue of the American Journal of Public Health.
This work was funded by the National Institutes of Health through a translational research grant from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (DK067896-01A2) and by the Resource Centers for Minority Aging Research program of the National Institute on Aging (P30-AG15272).
UCSF is a leading university dedicated to promoting health worldwide through advanced biomedical research, graduate-level education in the life sciences and health professions, and excellence in patient care.

It's important for us to create a climate which together with different kinds of knowledge will give the children a sense of trust towards their fellow students, regardless of age. It is also important to be preparet to meed changes and new conditions.
We emphasize working with pupil democracy and the childres influence in the work we perform actively. Wurking with social skills is an important part in everthing we do. A work procedure where the pupils play an active role is characteristic of our way of working. Our organization consists of work groups and joint effort between different groups.
Reflection and following-up our work are important parts of our activities for us to be able to constantly learn to take care of our knowledge.

Conference underscores young people’s leadership in HIV prevention
27 August 2010
The role of young people in improving the state of the world took centre stage at this week’s World Youth Conference in Leon, Mexico. Over five days, delegates from 112 countries—including 25 000 youth and representatives from government, civil society and the United Nations—shared ideas on young people’s involvement in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
With an estimated 40% of new HIV infections occurring among people aged 15-24, a youth-centered approach to the AIDS response will be critical to meet MDG 6—halting and reversing the spread of HIV—and to ensure efforts are sustained in the long term.
In a video message to young delegates, UNAIDS Executive Director Michel Sidibé said that young people had the power to shape a future with zero new infections, zero discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths. “Each of you is a driving force for change and development in your own countries,” he said. “Together you are an incredible movement that is shaping the future of the world.”
Of the 33.4 million people living with HIV worldwide, some 5 million are young people. An estimated 2500 young people become newly infected with HIV each day. The epidemic has taken a particularly devastating toll on the lives of young women, who account for 66% of infections among youth worldwide.
Empowering young people to protect themselves from HIV represents one of UNAIDS’ ten priority areas, with the overall goal of a 30% reduction in new HIV infections by 2015.
At a joint workshop on HIV and young people, UNAIDS and UNFPA introduced a new “business case” outlining successes to date in the HIV response among youth and areas for improvement. Through the workshop, young delegates were invited to offer their perspectives on the relevance and application of the business case at the national level. Evidence-based information and HIV services, including sexual and reproductive health, were highlighted as critical to reducing infection among young people. Many participants voiced concern over reaching young people with effective HIV prevention messages.
“As we are still young and exploring, we may get into risky behaviors,” said Rodriguez Gastelum, a youth participant from Mexico who attended the workshop. “Correct information on HIV is the first step—that will protect us.”
Less than 40% of young men and women have access to accurate knowledge about HIV transmission—far short of the 95% target set in the UNGASS Declaration of Commitment for the year 2010. In developing countries, excluding China, only 30% of young men and 19% of young women benefit from comprehensive information on HIV.
Despite challenges, there are signs of progress. A new study from UNAIDS has reported a more than 25% drop in HIV prevalence among young people in 15 countries heavily affected by the AIDS epidemic.
“Simply put, young people are leading a prevention revolution all over the globe,” said Dr. César Nunez, Director of the UNAIDS Regional Support Team for Latin America, in a health-focused session at the conference. “The empowerment of young people has led to changes in sexual behavior. Young people are choosing to have sex later, with fewer partners, and they are using condoms.”
Earlier this month, the UN launched the International Year of Youth, an initiative designed to increase youth participation in global development issues and enhance inter-cultural dialogue and understanding across generations. At a launch event in New York City, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged young people across the world to look beyond the borders of their own countries: “Engage with the world. Become a global citizen,” he said. “We are the leaders of today. You are the leaders of tomorrow.”

3. "We think the cane could pose a hazard to other students. We’d like your child to leave it at the door or in the locker."
Why is this statement problematic?
The proper use of the long, white cane will not cause a hazard but can
actually prevent hazardous situations from occurring. The cane identifies
a child as having a visual impairment so that others can respond appropriately.
Like vision, the cane provides preview of what is out in front and enables
the child to detect objects, identify drop offs and other changes in elevation,
and walk confidently at a normal speed. Furthermore, the cane helps the
child develop spatial concepts and environmental awareness. The child must
be taught to take personal responsibility for the cane and use it appropriately
for safe and independent travel.
Possible Responses for Parents/Advocates
- “According to Ellie’s formal orientation and mobility evaluation
the cane is a necessary tool for her safe and independent travel. In fact,
she is building life-long skills that will enable her to negotiate a variety
of environments independently.”
- “Jan needs her cane in the same way that a student in a wheelchair needs
wheels or a student with myopia needs eyeglasses. She uses it for safe and
independent mobility. Not allowing her to use her cane in the halls and classroom
will compromise not only her safety but also her understanding of the environment.
In addition, her IEP cannot be considered implemented if she is not allowed
to use her cane.”
- “Jack’s cane is a respectable and necessary tool that enables him to
move about safely, independently, and age appropriately. For example, it
would be very demeaning and inconvenient if Jack had to wait for someone
to ‘take’ him to the bathroom. Jack has been trained in the proper use of
his cane and should be expected to use it properly. The O&M Specialist*
would be glad to discuss any concerns you have.
*Orientation and Mobility Specialist
Read the Law
Collabortive effort between the
National Center on Severe and Sensory Disabilities
and the National Organization of Parents of Blind Children
Copyright © 2008 National Center on Severe and Sensory Disabilities
Copyright © 2006 National Center on Low-Incidence Disabilities
Permission to use for educational purposes granted.

Following the World Summit on Children in 1990 and Malaysia’s formulation of the National Plan of Action for Children (NPA), the Social Welfare Department and UNICEF work, hand-in-hand, to promote child participation in civil rights which include rights to information, expression and decision making.
Through this partnership, children and adolescents are trained to be facilitators and peer educators to promote the Convention on the Rights of the Child and create awareness for the prevention of violence and abuse against children. Young Malaysians are also given opportunities to contribute to the preparation of the NPA for 2001-2010; and to participate in various international and regional meetings.
In recognition of the special place young people have in society, Malaysia’s launch of the Say Yes campaign, part of the Global Movement for Children in 2001, was officiated by the Prime Minister. Malaysia's children also attended the UN General Assembly Special Session on Children in 2002.
In 2006, UNICEF continued its partnership with the Social Welfare Department to document Malaysia’s best practices on child participation.
9 October 2006:
2 February 2006:
25 November 2005:
14 December 2006:

Want to stay on top of all the space news? Follow @universetoday on Twitter
Sidereal Time is the time is takes for celestial bodies to ascend and descend in the night sky. We know that celestial bodies are in reality, fixed in their positions. The reason for their dramatic movement in the night is because of the rotation of the earth. This is the same reason why the Sun and the Moon seem to rise and set. For the longest time, this motion caused many philosophers and astronomers to assume that the Earth was the center of the Universe. Fortunately later astronomers like Copernicus were able to discern the true movements of the Earth, Moon, and Sun helping to explain their movements. The time that it takes for a star, planet or other fixed celestial body to ascend and descend in the night sky is also called sidereal period. Coincidentally this time corresponds to the time it takes for the Earth to rotate one revolution which is just under 24 hours.
Sidereal time is not like solar time which is measured by the movement of the sun. Or the lunar cycles which take about 28 days. It is the relative angle of a celestial object to the prime meridian of the vernal equinox of the earth. IF these terms are confusing, here is what they mean. In cartography, the Earth is bisected by two major lines of longitude and latitude. These lines are the 0 degree points on the globe. The 0 degree point for the latitude is the Equator the point where the Earth is perfectly bisected. It cut through South America and Africa. The 0 degree point for the longitude is the prime meridian. It exact location is Greenwich, UK. The Equinoxes are essentially the times of the year when the sun rise and sets at the exact same point of the horizon at the equator. This means that these are the only times the solar day is equally divided into 12 hours of day and 12 hours of night. The hour angle for a celestial object relative to this meridian is what we call sidereal time.This angle changes with the rotation of the Earth creating a pattern of ascension and descent for celestial bodies in the Earth’s sky.
With the knowledge of sidereal time astronomers can predict the positions of stars. The values for the sidereal time of celestial objects is compile in a table or start chart called an ephemeris. With this guide to sidereal time astronomers can find a celestial object regardless of the change in their position over the year.
There are also some great resources on the net. The U.S. Naval observatory has an online clock to help you find out the sidereal time in your area. There is also a great explanation on the astronomy section of the Cornell university site.

Tell me about the International Dark-Sky Association—how did it start, what's the mission?
IDA’s mission is to preserve and protect the nighttime environment and our heritage of dark skies through environmentally responsible outdoor lighting. IDA was founded in 1988 by a professional astronomer working at the Kitt Peak Observatory in Tucson, Arizona and an amateur astronomer who noticed that the increasing sky glow over Tucson was interfering with nighttime observations. Their message is simple, clear, and effective, and their efforts were fundamental in getting light pollution recognized around the world as an unwelcome and detrimental environmental condition.
What are some of the effects of light pollution on animals? On humans? Tell me about some of the science that supports this.
There are four main types of light pollution: sky glow (that strange orange dome over urban areas), glare (overly bright, unshielded points of light), light trespass (unwanted light intruding onto private property), and clutter (groupings of light sources). Animals and even plants are affected by sky glow and light trespass due to their extreme photosensitivity. Because seasonal temperatures can vary from year to year, many species rely on light cues to tell them when to shed leaves, mate, and reproduce. When outdoor lighting artificially prolongs the day, the instinctive rhythms of many species are affected.
Many species behave unnaturally in the presence of artificial light—for example, light at night decreases a firefly’s ability to be seen, thereby hindering its ability to attract a mate. Sea turtles and migratory birds use starlight to orient themselves, so light pollution has devastated their internal navigation systems. Some birds will crash into tall buildings, or fixate on a light source, circling around it until they are exhausted and unable to fly.
Glare from unshielded light sources presents the largest problem to humans. Effects of glare from poor outdoor lighting are a primary reason that the American Medical Association unanimously adopted Resolution 516 to support light pollution and glare reduction efforts last June. Depending on the severity, glare can cause discomfort or temporary night blindness. On the roadway, glares can interfere with visibility, presenting a hazard to both drivers and pedestrians. The problem gets worse as people age and gradually lose their ability to adjust to changing light levels.
Exposure to excessive light at night has been found to alter the circadian rhythm, interfere with sleep patterns, and suppress the sleep hormone melatonin. The amount of light needed to affect sleep patterns is not known, but sleeping in total darkness is recommended by both the CDC and the NIH as a way to promote a regular circadian rhythm.
What is International Dark-Sky Association doing to combat light pollution? How are you measuring the effectiveness of these campaigns?
As an environmental educational 501(c)(3) non-profit, IDA has enacted dynamic programs in the areas of technology, conservation, and public awareness. IDA’s Fixture Seal of Approval program directly attacks sky glow by establishing “dark sky-friendly” criteria for outdoor light fixtures.
Currently in the spotlight is our International Dark Sky Places (IDSPlaces) program, a conservation curriculum established to protect urban and rural starscapes. The IDS Communities and Dark Sky Developments of Distinction designations recognize outstanding dark sky preservation efforts in municipalities and planned communities. All designated IDSPlaces have met stringent lighting requirements through retrofits and legislation and have undertaken outreach efforts to educate the public about the importance of natural night. Many designees are successfully incorporating astronomy and stargazing into their local attractions, hosting festivals or sky watching events known as “star parties.”
In house, IDA collects, creates, and distributes information relating to light pollution, much of which is available for free on the IDA website. We also participate in industry meetings and technology expos, and actively collaborate with non-profit interest groups.
Do you see differences regionally? How bad is the East Coast in terms of light pollution?
Several New England states have taken great strides to protect their skies. The east coast has more light on the whole simply because it is more densely populated, not because the lighting is necessarily worse. We don’t see a huge difference regionally so much as from city to city. Rural and urban areas across the world have enacted dark sky ordinances or are undertaking retrofits in public lighting (usually as part of an energy saving endeavor) and their lighting is much more thoughtful, more aesthetically pleasing, and more efficient than cities or townships that have not.
What can you tell me about any legislation concerning light pollution, particularly on the East Coast? In New York? IDA’s newly opened public policy office in Washington, DC is creating a lot of opportunities for collaboration with other non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and some significant inroads with energy agencies and congressional leaders, but any national action is a long way off. Many of these accomplishments have been spurred by Leo Smith, IDA’s Regional Director for New England Sections. Connecticut is the furthest along in terms of addressing light pollution, with three state laws, one state building code requirement, and one requirement from the utility regulators to present a new streetlight rate for streetlights that are programmed to turn off at midnight are on the books.
The New Hampshire law, signed in July, also requires utility regulators to adopt a rate for streetlights that are turned off at midnight, as well as requiring shielded streetlights. Maine and Rhode Island both require shielded streetlights. New York isn’t quite there yet, though night lighting has been addressed in several regions, namely the municipalities of Tully, East Hampton, Southampton, Tuxedo Park, Riverhead, and Brookhaven.
IDA conducts third-party certification of light fixtures— how successful has this program been, how many certified fixtures are currently on the market and how receptive has the industry been to change?
IDA has reached out to the lighting industry since its inception. Good quality light at night is necessary for safety, security, and recreation, but outdoor light is the main cause of light pollution. Some members of the lighting community have been very apt to address this, and have worked to create products that minimize light pollution by directing light to the ground, where it is needed, instead of to the sky, where it becomes a wasteful nuisance. IDA is fortunate to have support from these companies, because they provide the technology to make our mission effective.
The Fixture Seal of Approval program was started in 2005 to recognize lighting manufacturers who integrated the concept of full shielding into their fixture design and to encourage market expansion of dark sky-friendly products. Any approved fixture must be fully shielded to emit no light above a 90 degree angle. This program has been wildly successful for both IDA and the lighting manufacturers who join. The IDA seal is gaining worldwide recognition and becoming a selling point for manufacturers and vendors alike, and the market for dark sky-friendly products is expanding as companies strive to design sleek, stylish, and efficient fixtures. Over 100 manufacturers have joined the FSA program to date, featuring approximately 300 fixture models.
What can consumers do to combat light pollution? And then, what can architects, builders, planners do to combat light pollution?
Shield your light sources, especially floodlights. A “par shield” that clips on to the fixture makes a huge difference in directing light where you want it to go. If you install dark sky-friendly fixtures outside your home or business, you’ve already made a difference. Look for the IDA Fixture Seal of Approval or purchase a fully-shielded or full-cutoff product. Those who want to learn more or work toward creating an ordinance can join a local IDA Section (information at darksky.org) or contact a local astronomy club.
Architects and builders interested in sustainability can achieve LEED Credit 8, which specifically addresses outdoor lighting. Again, purchasing and installing fully shielded fixtures in any new development is all it takes. The market now contains so many qualified fixtures that there is virtually no difference in price.
Light sent into the sky costs the U.S. approximately $2.2 billion every year. As energy efficiency becomes imperative, city planners must consider improvements in public lighting as a long term way to reduce energy and conserve public funds. Most streets can dramatically lessen their lighting without compromising driver response time or pedestrian safety.
In your view, what's the most compelling reason for consumers to swap their traditional outdoor lighting to a Dark Sky fixture, and how are you getting that message out?
The dark skies movement will resonate with anyone who recognizes the profound effect light has on a space, indoor or outdoor. Seriously, what other small change can you make that affects wildlife, energy, and the ambiance of your entire neighborhood? In addition to the personal benefits you receive in terms of reduced energy use and a more pleasant personal space, a shift to dark sky-friendly lighting shows an awareness of the environment at large and a respect for the place you live.
The dark sky message usually sells itself, once people become aware of it. IDA’s wonderful volunteers do a phenomenal job in spreading enthusiasm for the cause. Their interest in creating a sustainable, beautiful nighttime environment and their dedication to action is what drives the success this campaign. Thanks to the hard work of IDA volunteers worldwide, cities in the Americas, Europe, Asia, and even Australia are seeing the darkness.
For more information about the IDA, local policies, and where to find shielded lighting, visit darksky.org

v.: to dismantle or otherwise redistribute the composite parts of a whole, as with an automobile, motorcycle, or computer system, according to the respective practical or monetary value of each.
n./adj.: used to denote or describe an item whose original purpose or function as a whole is no longer viable, but whose constituent parts retain some individual practical or monetary value, as with a "yard out" motorcycle (often hyphenated: "yard-out"), also called a "parts machine".
Context: The parting out of automobiles, motorcycles, electronic computer systems, industrial and agricultural machinery, electrical appliances, medical apparatuses, nautical and aeronautical equipment and other mechanical devices and instrumentation is done as an economical and, incidentally, ecological means of recycling (see recycle) and reusing various components that may otherwise be more expensive or difficult to obtain.
See also: part out; part it out; dismantle; parts queen, junk wagon.
"Patrick had me yard out a Zenith carburetor from a Triumph Tigress as the British were up to no good."

Who Was Martin Luther King, Jr.?
ISBN 9780448478050 | 112 pages | 27 Dec 2007 | Grosset & Dunlap | 5.59 x 7.67in | 8 - 12 years
Summary of Who Was Martin Luther King, Jr.? Summary of Who Was Martin Luther King, Jr.? Reviews for Who Was Martin Luther King, Jr.? An Excerpt from Who Was Martin Luther King, Jr.?
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was only 25 when he helped organize the Montgomery Bus Boycott and was soon organizing black people across the country in support of the right to vote, desegregation, and other basic civil rights. Maintaining nonviolent and peaceful tactics even when his life was threatened, King was also an advocate for the poor and spoke out against racial and economic injustice until his death—from an assassin’s bullet—in 1968. With clearly written text that explains this tumultuous time in history and 80 black-and-white illustrations, this Who Was…? celebrates the vision and the legacy of a remarkable man.
To keep up-to-date, input your email address, and we will contact you on publication
Please alert me via email when:

Such was the condition in Kansas at the opening of the presidential year of 1856, and it became one of the leading issues of the campaign. The whole country was aroused over reports from Kansas, and it was impossible that such a question remain long out of the halls of Congress, notwithstanding the claim of Douglas that his famous bill would remove the slavery question from national politics. In May, 1856, Senator Sumner made a powerful speech on "The Crime against Kansas." The speech was a fearful arraignment of the slave power. But the speaker went out of his way to abuse certain senators whom he did not like, especially Senator Butler of South Carolina, who was then absent from the city, and who had made no special personal attack on Sumner.
Charles Sumner, with all his learning, was a narrow-minded man. He was opinionated, egotistical, and incapable of giving credit to another for an honest difference of opinion. But he was sincerely honest and courageous.¹ His espousal of the cause of the slave when that cause was very unpopular rose from the innermost depths of his soul. His furious attack on Butler was occasioned by the indignation expressed by the latter at the audacity of the Topeka convention in applying for statehood. But Sumner suffered severely for his extravagance. Two days after making this speech, as he sat at his desk writing, after the Senate had adjourned, he was assaulted with a cane by Preston Brooks, a member of the House and a relative of Senator Butler. Brooks rained blows on Sumner's head with great ferocity. Sumner sat so near his desk that he had no chance to defend himself; but at length he rose, wrenching the desk from its fastenings. Brooks then grappled with him and continued his blows until Sumner fell bleeding and unconscious to the floor.
So great were the injuries of the Massachusetts senator that he did not fully recover for four years; and indeed, never after this assault was he the powerful, robust athlete that he had been before. No incident in many years revealed more vividly the vast gulf between the North and the South than did the different manner of their receiving the news of this assault on Sumner² Throughout the North the deed was denounced as a cowardly outrage, unworthy of any but a bully and a thug. At the South, where Sumner was hated above all men, the verdict was that he received only the punishment he deserved. Brooks was hailed as a champion and a hero, and was presented with many canes. He resigned his seat in the House because of a majority vote--not the necessary two thirds--for his expulsion; but he was immediately reëlected by his district.³
Meantime matters were growing worse on the plains of Kansas. On the day that intervened between the closing of Sumner's speech and the assault by Brooks the town of Lawrence was sacked by a mob. The House of Representatives sent a committee of three to Kansas to investigate matters and report. This committee, composed of William A. Howard of Michigan, John Sherman of Ohio, and Mordecai Oliver of Missouri, after examining several hundred witnesses, reported in July. Howard and Sherman reported favorably to the free-state party, but agreed that the election of Reeder to Congress, as that of Whitfield, was illegal. Oliver made a minority report favoring the southern view.
With the attack on Lawrence the Civil War in Kansas may be said to have begun. Soon after this occurred the massacre of Pottawatomie, the leader of which was John Brown. Brown had come from the East to join his sons, who had been among the early settlers of Kansas. He was an ascetic and a fanatic. He had come to Kansas to make it a free state at any hazard. He regarded slavery with a mortal hatred, and while his courage was unlimited and his intentions upright, his soul was too utterly narrow to see a thing in its true light. He believed that the only way to free the slaves was to kill the slaveholders. "Without the shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins," said John Brown.
A few free-state men, one of whom was a neighbor of Brown, had been killed by the opposite party, and Brown determined that an equal number of them should suffer death to expiate the crime. He organized a night raid--his sons and a few others--and started on his bloody errand. They called at one farmhouse after another and slew the men in cold blood. He did not inquire if they were guilty of not guilty; enough if they belonged to the opposite party. One man was dragged from the presence of a sick wife. Her pleadings that he be spared were not heeded. He was murdered in cold blood in the road before his house. Before the end of that bloody night raid Brown's party had put six or seven men to death--for no crime except that they belonged to the opposite party and had made threats--an offense of which Brown's party were equally guilty. When the news of this ghastly work was flashed over the country, the people in general refused to believe it; and to the credit of the free-state people in Kansas, they repudiated it as wholly unwarranted.
¹While he was uttering this speech, in which he attacked Senator Douglas also without mercy, the latter said to a friend: "Do you hear that man? He may be a fool, but I tell you that he has pluck." Poore's "Reminiscences," Vol. I, p. 461.
²Rhodes, Vol. II, p. 143
³Brooks died the following January, and Butler in May of the same year.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
A modem self-test in which data from the keyboard or an internal test pattern is sent to the modem's transmitter, turned into analog form, looped back to the receiver, and converted back into digital form.
A variety of signals and wavelengths that can be transmitted over communications lines such as the sound of a voice over the phone line.
The mode used by your modem when answering an incoming call from an originating modem. The transmit/receive frequencies are the reverse of the originating modem, which is in originate mode.
A computer program designed to perform a specific task or set of tasks. Examples include word processing and spreadsheet applications.
Automatic Repeat reQuest. A function that allows your modem to detect flawed data and request that it be retransmitted. See MNP and V.42.
American Standard Code for Information Interchange. A code used to represent letters, numbers, and special characters such as $, !, and /.
Data transmission in which the length of time between transmitted characters may vary. Because characters may not be transmitted at set intervals, start/stop bits are used to mark the beginning and end of each character.
Sets the modem to pick up the phone line when it detects a certain number of rings. See S-register S0 in the Technical Reference section of this guide.
A process where your modem dials a call for you. The dialing process is initiated by sending an ATDT (dial tone) or ATDP (dial pulse) command followed by the telephone number. Auto-dial is used to dial voice numbers. See basic data command Dn in the Technical Reference section of this guide.
A term used to measure the speed of an analog transmission from one point to another. Although not technically accurate, baud rate is commonly used to mean bit rate.
A 0 or 1, reflecting the use of the binary numbering system. Used because the computer recognizes either of two states, OFF or ON. Shortened form of binary digit is bit.
Also referred to as transmission rate. The number of binary digits, or bits, transmitted per second (bps). Communications channels using analog modems are established at set bit rates, commonly 2400, 4800, 9600, 14,400, 28,800, 33,600, and higher.
bits per second (bps)
The bits (binary digits) per second rate. Thousands of bits per second are expressed as kilobits per second (Kbps).
A temporary memory area used as storage during input and output operations. An example is the modem's command buffer.
A group of binary digits stored and operated upon as a unit. Most often the term refers to 8-bit units or characters. One kilobyte (KB) is equal to 1,024 bytes or characters; 640 KB is equal to 655,360 bytes or characters.
The basic signal altered or modulated by the modem in order to carry information.
A representation, coded in binary digits, of a letter, number, or other symbol.
characters per second (cps)
A data transfer rate generally estimated from the bit rate and the character length. For example, at 2400 bps, 8-bit characters with start/stop bits (for a total of ten bits per character) will be transmitted at a rate of approximately 240 characters per second (cps). Some protocols, such as error-control protocols, employ advanced techniques such as longer transmission frames and data compression to increase cps.
class 1 and 2.0
International standards used by fax application programs and faxmodems for sending and receiving faxes.
cyclic redundancy checking (CRC)
An error-detection technique consisting of a test performed on each block or frame of data by both sending and receiving modems. The sending modem inserts the results of its tests in each data block in the form of a CRC code. The receiving modem compares its results with the received CRC code and responds with either a positive or negative acknowledgment.
The transmission or sharing of data between computers via an electronic medium.
data compression table
A table containing values assigned for each character during a call under MNP5 data compression. Default values in the table are continually altered and built during each call: The longer the table, the more efficient throughput gained.
Mode used by a modem when sending and receiving data files.
Data Communications (or Circuit-Terminating) Equipment, such as dial-up modems that establish and control the data link via the telephone network.
Any setting assumed, at startup or reset, by the computer's software and attached devices. The computer or software will use these settings until changed by the user or other software.
A test that checks the modem's RS-232 interface and the cable that connects the terminal or computer and the modem. The modem receives data (in the form of digital signals) from the computer or terminal and immediately returns the data to the screen for verification.
Discrete, uniform signals. In this guide, the term refers to the binary digits 0 and 1.
Data Terminal (or Terminating) Equipment. A computer that generates or is the final destination of data.
Indicates a communications channel capable of carrying signals in both directions. See half-duplex, full-duplex.
Electronic Industries Association (EIA)
Group which defines electronic standards in the U.S.
Various techniques that check the reliability of characters (parity) or blocks of data. V.42 and MNP error-control protocols use error detection (CRC) and retransmission of flawed frames (ARQ).
A method for transmitting the image on a page from one point to another. Commonly referred to as fax.
The mode used by a modem to send and receive data in facsimile format. See definitions for V.17, V.27 ter, V.29.
A mechanism that compensates for differences in the flow of data into and out of a modem or other device. See extended data commands &Hn, &In, &Rn in the Technical Reference section of this guide.
A data communications term for a block of data with header and trailer information attached. The added information usually includes a frame number, block size data, error-check codes, and Start/End indicators.
Signals can flow in both directions at the same time over one line. In microcomputer communications, this may refer to the suppression of the online local echo.
Signals can flow in both directions, but only one way at a time. In microcomputer communications, may refer to activation of the online local echo, which causes the modem to send a copy of the transmitted data to the screen of the sending computer.
Hertz, a frequency measurement unit used internationally to indicate cycles per second.
An electronic communications network that connects computer networks and organizational computer facilities around the world.
Internet Service Provider (ISP)
A company that provides dial-up (modem) access to the Internet for a fee.
An international organization that defines standards for telegraphic and telephone equipment. For example, the Bell 212A standard for 1200-bps communication in North America is observed internationally as ITU-T V.22. For 2400-bps communication, most U.S. manufacturers observe V.22 bis.
Link Access Procedure for Modems. An error-control protocol defined in ITU-T recommendation V.42. Like the MNP protocols, LAPM uses cyclic redundancy checking (CRC) and retransmission of corrupted data (ARQ) to ensure data reliability.
A modem feature that enables the modem to display keyboard commands and transmitted data on the screen. See basic data command En in the Technical Reference section of this guide.
Microcom Networking Protocol, an error-control protocol developed by Microcom, Inc., and now in the public domain. There are several different MNP protocols, but the most commonly used one ensures error-free transmission through error detection (CRC) and retransmission of flawed frames.
A device that transmits/receives computer data through a communications channel such as radio or telephone lines. It also changes signals received from the phone line back to digital signals before passing them to the receiving computer.
nonvolatile memory (NVRAM)
User-programmable random access memory whose data is retained when power is turned off. On the USRobotics modem, it includes four stored phone numbers and the modem settings.
Modem operations that are the equivalent of manually lifting a phone receiver (taking it off-hook) and replacing it (going on-hook).
online fall back/fall forward
A feature that allows high-speed, error-control modems to monitor line quality and fall back to the next lower speed in a defined range if line quality diminishes. As line conditions improve, the modems switch up to the next higher speed.
The mode used by your modem when initiating an outgoing call to a destination modem. The transmit/receive frequencies are the reverse of the called modem, which is in answer mode.
A simple error-detection method that checks the validity of a transmitted character. Character checking has been surpassed by more reliable and efficient forms of error checking, including V.42 and MNP 2-4 protocols. Either the same type of parity must be used by two communicating computers, or both may omit parity.
A system of rules and procedures governing communications between two or more devices. Protocols vary, but communicating devices must follow the same protocol in order to exchange data. The format of the data, readiness to receive or send, error detection and error correction are some of the operations that may be defined in protocols.
Random Access Memory. Memory that is available for use when the modem is turned on, but that clears of all information when the power is turned off. The modem's RAM holds the current operational settings, a flow control buffer, and a command buffer.
remote digital loopback
A test that checks the phone link and a remote modem's transmitter and receiver.
A copy of the data received by the remote system, returned to the sending system, and displayed on the screen. Remote echoing is a function of the remote system.
Read Only Memory. Permanent memory, not user-programmable.
The consecutive flow of data in a single channel. Compare to parallel transmissions where data flows simultaneously in multiple channels.
The signaling bits attached to a character before and after the character is transmitted during asynchronous transmission.
A device whose keyboard and display are used for sending and receiving data over a communications link. Differs from a microcomputer or a mainframe in that it has little or no internal processing capabilities.
Software mode that allows direct communication with the modem. Also known as command mode.
The amount of actual user data transmitted per second without the overhead of protocol information such as start/stop bits or frame headers and trailers. Compare with characters per second.
The ITU-T standard specification that covers the initial handshaking process.
An ITU-T standard for making facsimile connections at 14,400 bps, 12,000 bps, 9,600 bps, and 7,200 bps.
An ITU-T standard for modems operating in asynchronous mode at speeds up to 300 bps, full-duplex, on public switched telephone networks.
An ITU-T standard for modem communications at 1,200 bps, compatible with the Bell 212A standard observed in the U.S. and Canada.
An ITU-T standard for modem communications at 2,400 bps. The standard includes an automatic link negotiation fallback to 1,200 bps and compatibility with Bell 212A/V.22 modems.
An ITU-T standard for facsimile operations that specifies modulation at 4,800 bps, with fallback to 2,400 bps.
An ITU-T standard for facsimile operations that specifies modulation at 9,600 bps, with fallback to 7,200 bps.
An ITU-T standard for modem communications at 9,600 bps and 4,800 bps. V.32 modems fall back to 4,800 bps when line quality is impaired.
An ITU-T standard that extends the V.32 connection range: 4,800, 7,200, 9,600, 12,000, and 14,400 bps. V.32 bis modems fall back to the next lower speed when line quality is impaired, fall back further as necessary, and also fall forward (switch backup) when line conditions improve (see online fall back/fall forward).
An ITU-T standard that currently allows data rates as high as 28,800 bps.
An enhancement to V.34 that enables data transfer rates as high as 33,600 bps.
An ITU-T standard for modem communications that defines a two-stage process of detection and negotiation for LAPM error control.
An extension of ITU-T V.42 that defines a specific data compression scheme for use during V.42 connections.
An ITU-T standard for modem data compression. It provides for a 6:1 compression ratio.
The ITU-T standard for 56 Kbps modem communications. This technology uses the digital telephone network to increase the bit rate of the receive channel by eliminating the analog to digital conversion commonly found in modem connections. V.90 connections require a modem with V.90 or x2 technology calling a digitally connected Internet Service Provider or corporate host site compatible with V.90 or x2 technology.
The ITU-T standard for advanced 56 Kbps modem communications. This technology offers three new features to enhance the V.90 standard. The first feature is V.PCM-Upstream, which allows a modem's upstream communication to reach speeds of 48,000 bps. The second feature provides quicker connection times by allowing the modem to remember the line conditions of a V.92 supported service provider. The third feature is the Modem on Hold technology, which allows your Internet connection to be suspended when there is an inbound telephone call, then return to the connection when the call is completed without losing the connection. The V.92 technology can only be utilized if a V.92 modem is dialing into an Internet Service Provider that supports and provides a digital V.92 signal.
World Wide Web (WWW)
A part of the Internet designed to allow easier navigation of the network through the use of graphical user interfaces and hypertext links between different addresses.
USRobotics's trademark for its proprietary technology that uses the digital telephone network to increase the bit rate of the receive channel by eliminating the analog-to-digital conversion commonly found in modem connections. x2 connections require a modem with x2 technology calling a digitally connected Internet Service Provider or corporate host site compatible with x2 technology.
Standard ASCII control characters used to tell an intelligent device to stop/resume transmitting data.

Outcome Thinking with SOCRATES
Purpose: To provide an easy-to-remember summary of the key criteria and questions to help you develop a really “Well-Formed Outcome”. Using this model will significantly increase personal achievement over time and can also increase the immediate effectiveness of all your activities, for example, in meetings, negotiations and personal coaching sessions.
|S||Specify your goal||What is the specific goal you really want to achieve?
Is it stated in positive language?
If “Moving Away From” the Present State, what do you want instead of the problem?
|O||Own it||Is it within your control to make happen?
If not, what can you bring within control?
|C||Check your evidence for having achieved it||Step into it – ‘As if’ it is already achieved.
Allow it to become fully associated in your mind:
What are you seeing?
What are you hearing?
What are you feeling?
What are you thinking?
|R||Remember how you’ve achieved this particular goal||Looking back, how have you done this?
What skills and resources have you used?
|A||Add in your higher level ‘interests’||What does achieving this do for you?|
What does it mean to you?
What else is important to you about this?
|T||Test against the needs of others most closely affected||How does your achievement ‘dovetail’ with the needs of others affected by it?|
Is this acceptable to you?
What do they need at the same time?
|E||Ecology and other effects||Looking at the bigger systems that may be affected:|
What is the impact of this achievement?
What are the further consequences?
What other ripples can you identify?
|S||Step out and start||Looking back, what were your first steps?
Dissociate – Is the image truly compelling?
Test commitment (a score out of 10)
10 = Committed
8-9 Ask what has to be true to make it 10?
7 or less? – Check for any hidden positive by-products of the Present State and incorporate them. Or, change the goal!

This story is from the category Embodiment
Date posted: 17/11/2011
If you tell yourself that someone who's being mean is just having a bad day -- it's not about you -- you may actually be able to stave off bad feelings, according to a new study which will be published in an upcoming issue of Psychological Science, a journal of the Association for Psychological Science.
Having someone angry at you isn't pleasant. A strategy commonly suggested in cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy is to find another way to look at the angry person. For example, you might tell yourself that they've probably just lost their dog or gotten a cancer diagnosis and are taking it out on you. Stanford researchers Jens Blechert, Gal Sheppes, Carolina Di Tella, Hants Williams, and James J. Gross wanted to study the efficiency and the speed of the process of reappraising emotions. "You can see this as a kind of race between the emotional information and the reappraisal information in the brain: emotional processing proceeds from the back to the front of the brain, and the reappraisal is generated in the front of the brain and proceeds toward the back of the brain where it modifies emotional processing," Blechert says.
Blechert and his colleagues came up with two experiments to study this process. Participants were shown several series of faces and tested on their reactions. For example, in one set, they were told to consider that the people they'd seen had had a bad day, but it's nothing to do you with you. "So we trained the participants a little bit, not to take this emotion personally, but directed at someone else," Blechert says.
They found that, once people had adjusted their attitude toward someone, they weren't disturbed by that person's angry face the next time it appeared. On the other hand, when participants were told to just feel the emotions brought on by an angry face, they continued to be upset by that face. In a second study, the researchers recorded electrical brain activity from the scalp and found that reappraising wiped out the signals of the negative emotions people felt when they just looked at the faces.
Psychologists used to think that people had to feel the negative emotion, and then get rid of it; this research suggests that, if people are prepared, it's actually a much faster and deeper process.
"If you're trained with reappraisal, and you know your boss is frequently in a bad mood, you can prepare yourself to go into a meeting," says Blechert, who also works as a therapist. "He can scream and yell and shout but there'll be nothing." But this study only looked at still pictures of angry faces; next, Blechert would like to test how people respond to a video of someone yelling at them.
See the full Story via external site: www.sciencedaily.com
Most recent stories in this category (Embodiment):
04/05/2013: Bielefeld robots take part in a space simulation

African Americans in the Bluegrass
Whether you are spending a day, a week or longer in the Bluegrass Region, you and your family will learn fascinating information about African Americans. Gleanings from your travels will become answers to questions that you might not ever have thought to ask.
History in the Heart of Downtown
The public square at the center of downtown was platted in 1780 as the site of the courthouse for the newly established town of Lexington. The square has always been, and still is, a place where significant events and community activities have occurred. Archive records tell of a fight between a school teacher and a wildcat, controversial slave auctions, military drills, Civil War skirmishes, riots, hangings, speeches and fires that destroyed previous courthouses. This history has been inclusive of African Americans both enslaved and free.
By 1789, an area of the square had been designated as a marketplace and named after the market in London, England - Cheapside (old English ceapan means to buy). William Tucker (1787-1837), a free African American, was one of the merchants who advertised the sale of household items and spices from his stall. Farmers and others, during their monthly visits to transact legal business, bought, sold and swapped livestock and agricultural products. The sale activity, known as Court Day, ended in 1921. Historian J. Winston Coleman, Jr. documented two dozen dealers in Lexington who bought and sold the enslaved between 1833 and 1865. This commercial enterprise established Lexington as one of the largest slave markets in the south. The Cheapside Auction Block stood near Main Street in the general vicinity of the monument for J.C. Breckinridge. The historical marker giving an account of the sale of African Americans stands in the northeast courtyard on Short Street. It was placed on the former site of the whipping post, erected by order of town trustees in 1806.
The impressive Romanesque design courthouse, the fourth built on site, was erected between 1898 and 1900. The Tandy and Byrd Construction Company, owned by African Americans Henry Tandy and Albert Byrd, laid the brick under the stone façade. In 2003 the building became the Lexington History Center; it closed in 2012 for renovation.
|Blue Note: A number of nationally known individuals started their lives in Kentucky. Vertner Tandy (1885-1949), son of constructor Henry Tandy, became the first licensed architect in New York and a founding member of the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternal organization. He designed the New York mansion of Madam C.J. Walker, the hair care product millionaire and Berea Hall dormitory on the campus of Lincoln Institute, Simpsonville.|
In 2009, Cheapside once again became an open-air market when area farmers and merchants began selling fresh produce and food products every Saturday from April through November. The pavilion also serves as performance space for musicians during “Thursday Night Live” and shelters those who attend local festivals, events and celebrations.
Walk around the square to read the wayside markers and stroll our downtown streets to view other points of interest. Historical Highway Markers are located throughout Lexington. Those highlighting African American history include: Doctors' offices at 118 N. Broadway; Historic Pleasant Green Baptist Church at 540 Maxwell Street; Lyman T. Johnson who integrated the University of Kentucky on Administration Drive; Polk/Dalton Infirmary at 148 Deweese Street; African Cemetery No. 2 at 419 East Seventh Street; The Colored Orphan Home at 644 Georgetown Street; The Agricultural and Mechanical Fair of Colored People at Georgetown Street past Nandino Drive; and Maddoxtown Community on Huffman Mill Road. Main Street Baptist Church will be placing a marker at their church in 2013 celebrating 150 years at their West Main Street location.
|Blue Note: The Aviation Museum at Bluegrass Airport off Man-O-War Boulevard and U.S. Hwy 60 has an exhibit about the Tuskegee Airmen of Kentucky as well as other aviation history. 4316 Hanger Drive, behind the airport. (859)231-1219.|
Equine Industry Superstars
Plan a visit to the Kentucky Horse Park by traveling down Hwy 922, Newtown Pike, to Iron Works Pike. On the way, you’ll pass the Coldstream Research Farm on the left. It was once the thoroughbred breeding farm McGrathiana, owned by H.P. McGrath. On this farm worked Oliver Lewis, the African American jockey who won the inaugural Kentucky Derby in 1875. The winning thoroughbred was Aristides, trained by renowned African American Ansel Williamson. Williamson was inducted into the National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame in 1998. Outlining a portion of the original boundary of the farm is a rock wall fence. A sign designates that it was crafted by African American masons who had replaced the Scottish and Irish immigrant stone masons of the 1840s and 1850s.
Admission to the Kentucky Horse Park includes both the International Museum of the Horse and the American Saddle Horse Museum. African Americans were the national sports superstars during the early development of the thoroughbred racing and Saddlebred horse industries. There are memorials to Isaac Murphy, the first African American jockey to win three Kentucky Derbies, and the famous thoroughbred, Man-O-War and his groom, Will Harbut. "The Buffalo Soldiers of the Western Frontier" is a permanent exhibit housed in the International Museum of the Horse. Pick up a DVD produced by the American Saddlebred Association entitled "Out of the Shadows", the story of African American trainers and owners. (859)233-4303.
|Blue Note: The rock fences seen as you travel the roadways are of limestone that was uncovered in fields being cultivated for agriculture as well as quarried. Most were dry laid - without the use of mortar. The Lexington Fayette Urban County government has ordinances in place that encourage the preservation and restoration of area stone fences. The nonprofit Dry Stone Conservancy has taken on the task of preserving and restoring the stone fences by conducting workshops to train new masons in old techniques. Look for signs that designate the dates, styles and builders of these fences.|
African Americans played an important role in the development of the racing industry. Stop by the Lexington Public Library downtown and you’ll see a mural highlighting a number of influential early African American jockeys, and the world’s largest ceiling clock as well! (859)231-5501.
The Stories of Slaves and Soldiers
Another day's tour can take you just outside Lexington to Waveland, site of a restored historic mansion and slave quarters. Head south on Nicholasville Road, then turn right onto Waveland Museum Lane. The stone building where the enslaved were housed and worked has been preserved and furnished with period artifacts. The guides tell you the history of enslaved on the property in conjunction with the story of the Bryan family, relatives of Daniel Boone, who lived in the Mansion house. (859)272-3611.
Leaving Waveland, turn right onto Hwy 27 again and travel south past Nicholasville, taking the 27 Bypass. Signs let you know you are approaching Camp Nelson, established in 1863 as a supply camp for the Union Army during the Civil War. It became the third largest recruitment and training center for African Americans who formed the regiments known as the United States Colored Troops. Kentucky recruiters enlisted 23,700 African Americans, primarily among those who were enslaved. Some 10,000 began their training at Camp Nelson.
The camp originally encompassed 4,000 acres and held 300 buildings which were dismantled following the war. The house that was used as headquarters was saved and has been restored. Guided tours are available. A self guided tour of the grounds will lead you to the camp's earthen fortifications which are being restored. A number of artifacts which have been unearthed can be viewed in the interpretive center, a replica of a barracks. Camp Nelson Heritage Park was added to the National Parks Underground Railroad Network to Freedom in 2007.
The third weekend in September, the park celebrates Camp Nelson Days. The site comes alive with re-enactors of the 12th Heavy Regiment of the USCT and other military units. Lectures and demonstrations (firing of the cannon, cavalry charges, open fire cooking) help you experience some of what camp life was like for the soldiers as well as the families who escaped slavery and became free.
Adjacent to the Heritage Park is the National Military Cemetery. In an original section, the grave sites of African American soldiers can be found. Check the list of those who are interred to see if you might have relatives who were veterans.
Just beyond the park are several Kentucky Highway Markers that tell the history as it relates to the formation of the Hall community and the Ariel school established following the closing of the camp. (859)881-5716.
|Blue Note: The town of Nicholasville is the birthplace of Morgan and Marvin Smith, the twin brothers whose photography captured images of Harlem, New York between 1935 and 1952.|
Cousins of Influence
Lexington and Richmond are the locations of homes of two influential men who were cousins. Ashland, the Henry Clay Estate is located at 120 Sycamore Drive, just off Richmond Road. At its zenith, the estate encompassed over 600 acres which were developed, cultivated and harvested by 50 enslaved at one time by Mr. Clay's telling. The farming operations also included active livestock breeding of horses, sheep and cattle. An interpretive history of the work performed by the enslaved in the management of the farm and household is presented. There are archival panels along with a sketch of Charles Dupuy, a member of the family responsible for the personal care of the Clay household. The Dupuy family traveled to Washington, D.C. when Henry Clay was appointed Secretary of State in 1825 and lived in the Decatur house, the Clay’s official residence. The story of Charlotte Dupuy's lawsuit filed in 1829, petitioning for her freedom as well as that of her two children, is truly fascinating. Charlotte did not win the suit, but Henry Clay did finally emancipate her and her two children, Charles and Mary Ann, in the 1840s. There are archive photos of the T.H. Hummons' family and other African Americans who were employed in the household from the 1900s to 1964. (859)266-8581.
From the Henry Clay estate, turn right onto Richmond Road and take I-75 South to Richmond, exit 95, to discover White Hall State Historic Site, the home of Henry Clay's cousin. The road leads to the home of Cassius Marcellus Clay - not the boxer - but the man who served as Ambassador to Russia during Abraham Lincoln's presidency. Cassius became an ardent emancipationist, having freed 50 of those enslaved to him in 1844. He printed the True American, a newspaper in 1845 promoting the emancipation of the enslaved. White Hall, a 44 room Italianate mansion, makes an impressive appearance as you approach the entrance.
|Blue Note: Cassius M. Clay supported the founding of Berea College in 1855, donating both land and money. Founder John G. Fee promoted the idea of a school where students from the Appalachian region could be educated regardless of race and income. Julia Britton, grandmother of Benjamin Hooks, Director of the NAACP, John H. Jackson, first president of Kentucky State University and Carter G. Woodson, founder of Black History Week, were graduates. The college is located in Berea, KY, just south of Richmond. You can spend a full day in the town enjoying the food, crafts and history.|
At the right rear of the house is a stone building that was used as housing and workspace for the enslaved. Several of the original outbuildings have also been restored. One serves as the Gift Shop and location for admission to the home. There are picnic tables and restroom facilities, so plan for lunch or a late afternoon snack on the grounds. (859)623-9178
An Afternoon in Paris
A scenic drive to Paris will take you past historic horse farms and more rock wall fences. Take Broadway/Paris Pike, Hwy 68 North from Lexington. One of the first stops should be the Thoroughbred Training Center located at 3380 Paris Pike. This facility actually trains future champion horses. You do need to be there before 9 a.m. if you want to see the horses put through their paces. Observing the work here will help you understand what is involved in the care and preparation of thoroughbreds for their careers in racing.
In earlier times, the tasks you observe would have been performed by African Americans, many of whom were children and young males. At age seven and eight, they started working in the barns and stables. By ten years of age some were being mounted on the horses as exercisers. Jockeys Isaac Murphy and William Walker began riding at the age of 11 and Raleigh Colston, Jr. rode in his first Kentucky Derby at the age of 13 in 1875. (859)293-1853. Reservations recommended.
If you have stopped at the training center, return to Paris Pike and continue into town. Visit the Hopewell Museum, (859)987-7274, located in the old Paris post office at 800 Pleasant Street. There is a permanent display featuring Garrett Morgan, inventor of the traffic signal and gas mask. Look for the Kentucky Historical Highway Marker at 10th and Vine Streets that marks the birthplace of Garrett Morgan.
Several quaint, independently owned restaurants make great lunch or dinner stops to round out your afternoon in Paris.
A Hamlet and a Railroad Town
Leaving Lexington from another direction, head west on Leestown Road (Hwy 421) and you’ll pass an African American community established in 1865 by Frederick Braxton, founder and minister of the Main Street Baptist Church in Lexington. He had purchased land and sold small acreage to other blacks after emancipation. They named the community in his honor, Bracktown.
Stay on Hwy 421 until you reach Midway. Turn left at Hwy 62 which will lead you to town. Don't be surprised to find that the railroad tracks run through the middle of the street. When goods were delivered by rail, it made it convenient to off load supplies directly to stores. On Railroad Street, a marker pays tribute to Edward Dudley "Dick" Brown. He was born into slavery in Lexington about 1848. R.A. Alexander purchased him at auction around 1856 and brought him to the Woodburn farm in Woodford County where he began his career as a stable boy. He eventually advanced to exerciser, jockey, trainer and finally owner of his own thoroughbred, Ben Brush, 1896 Kentucky Derby winner. Also in town are Historical Markers detailing the history of the Second Christian Church, Smith Street; Pilgrim Baptist Church, 133 East Stephen Street and St. Matthews AME Church, 112 S. Winter Street. They are within walking distance from Railroad Street.
A Capital Idea
Leaving Midway, get back on Hwy 421 and follow it into Frankfort, Kentucky’s capital. Take the by-pass until you see the sign directing you to Kentucky State University. Founded in 1887 by act of legislature, it became the first state supported school to train African Americans to become teachers. John H. Jackson, a native of Lexington, became its first president. Recitation Hall was the first building completed in 1887 by stone mason, James C. Brown. The building was renamed Jackson Hall and placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1973. The building is now the office/museum of the Center of Excellence for the Study of Kentucky African Americans. Visit the Welcome Center to view a display on African American history. Visitor permit parking is available.
Other sites to visit in Frankfort are the Memorial to United States Colored Troops at the Greenhill Cemetery, the Kentucky Military History Museum, the Thomas D. Clark Center for Kentucky History, Kentucky State Capitol and Old State Capitol. Historic Markers are located at St. John AME Church, 210 West Clinton; 1st Baptist Church at 100 W. Clinton and Emily Thomas Tubman House on Washington Street.
For more information call the Lexington Convention and Visitors Bureau at 800-845-3959.
Written by Yvonne Giles, December 2008

Botanical Name and Pronunciation:
Dendranthema x grandiflorum (den-DRAN-the-ma grand-I-FLOR-um)
shades of red, pink, orange, bronze, yellow, white
Form and Size:
Daisy spray mums have a leafy stem with many blooms. The blooms have several petals that uniformly extend out from an eye-like center. Gerbera daisies and chrysanthemum daises are similar.
7 – 14 days, sometimes longer
Cut under water and place in fresh water with flower food. The stem must be cut above any woody portions to ensure good water intake. Do not pound stem ends, this will not help to ensure good water intake.
History and Usage:
A member of the Compositae (aster) family, chrysanthemums, including daisy mums, originated in China. They were first introduced to Japan in 400 A.D. They were then considered the emblem of the imperial family. They were introduced to Europe in the late 18th century. Chrysanthemums have a long vase life, so they go well in any arrangement. Daisy spray mums can be used as a filler flower, or in an arrangement as the main attraction.
Points of Interest:
Relatives of the chrysanthemum include cosmos, dahlia, calendula and zinnia. In Italy, mums are synonymous with death and funerals.

|Regel 30:||Regel 30:|
|Sediment supply from soft cliffs <br> © A. J. Chadwick
|Sediment supply from soft cliffs <br> © A. J. Chadwick
The current world’s coastlines were formed as a result of the last ice age, which ended about 10,000 years ago (see the beach management manual <ref name="CIRIA">CIRIA (2010). Beach management manual, Second Edition. Publication no. RP787, London.</ref>). At that time large ice sheets covered more of the world’s land masses than they do at present. As they melted there was a rapid rise of sea level (about 120m between 20,000 and 6000 years ago). Vast quantities of sediment were carried by rivers to the sea during this period, eventually forming the pre-cursor to our present coastlines as the rate of sea level rise rapidly reduced about 6000 years ago. Much of our beaches today are composed of the remnants of these sediments, composed predominantly of sand and gravel. These sources of beach material have subsequently been supplemented by [[Coast erosion|coastal erosion]] of soft cliffs and the reduced but continuing supply of sediments from rivers. Material has also been derived from offshore banks left behind by relatively rapid rises of sea level after cold episodes in the earth’s climate.
The current world’s coastlines were formed as a result of the last ice age, which ended about 10,000 years ago (see the beach management manual <ref name="CIRIA">CIRIA (2010). Beach management manual, Second Edition. Publication no. RP787, London. </ref>). At that time large ice sheets covered more of the world’s land masses than they do at present. As they melted there was a rapid rise of sea level (about 120m between 20,000 and 6000 years ago). Vast quantities of sediment were carried by rivers to the sea during this period, eventually forming the pre-cursor to our present coastlines as the rate of sea level rise rapidly reduced about 6000 years ago. Much of our beaches today are composed of the remnants of these sediments, composed predominantly of sand and gravel. These sources of beach material have subsequently been supplemented by [[Coast erosion|coastal erosion]] of soft cliffs and the reduced but continuing supply of sediments from rivers. Material has also been derived from offshore banks left behind by relatively rapid rises of sea level after cold episodes in the earth’s climate.
Versie van 16 okt 2012 om 09:36
Gravel beaches are widespread around the world, including the USA, Canada, Japan, Argentina, New Zealand and the wave dominated coastlines of Northern Europe . In the UK, about one third of the coastline is protected by such beaches .
In coastal defence schemes, considerable use is made of coarse-grained (gravel) sediment to replenish eroding beaches, often in conjunction with structures such as rock or wooden groynes or offshore breakwaters. This is because such beaches are known to be an efficient form of natural coastal defence . Two examples from the UK are those at Sidmouth, Devon and Elmer, West Sussex.
|Sidmouth coastal defence scheme||Elmer coastal defence scheme |
Picture courtesy of the Arun District Council
Research into the particular characteristics of gravel beaches and their engineering analysis is relatively new, with much of the progress being made recently. In the 1990’s small scale experimental measurements and early field studies lead to the subsequent development of parametric models for profile prediction, longshore transport and the stability of barrier beaches. Since 2002, two major large scale experimental studies and some new comprehensive field studies have been undertaken. Since that time, good progress has also been made in process based numerical modelling systems for long and cross shore transport.
The emphasis of the article is to present in a clear and concise manner the most relevant concepts, basic understanding and insights into the behaviour of gravel beaches, to provide a summary of the available engineering analysis techniques and modelling approaches and to provide guidance to further reading and a list of the most relevant references to work carried out since 1990.
|Sediment supply from soft cliffs |
© A. J. Chadwick
The current world’s coastlines were formed as a result of the last ice age, which ended about 10,000 years ago (see the beach management manual ). At that time large ice sheets covered more of the world’s land masses than they do at present. As they melted there was a rapid rise of sea level (about 120m between 20,000 and 6000 years ago). Vast quantities of sediment were carried by rivers to the sea during this period, eventually forming the pre-cursor to our present coastlines as the rate of sea level rise rapidly reduced about 6000 years ago. Much of our beaches today are composed of the remnants of these sediments, composed predominantly of sand and gravel. These sources of beach material have subsequently been supplemented by coastal erosion of soft cliffs and the reduced but continuing supply of sediments from rivers. Material has also been derived from offshore banks left behind by relatively rapid rises of sea level after cold episodes in the earth’s climate.
Sediment classification and properties
|all pictures: © A. J. Chadwick|
Traditionally sand and gravel sizes have been classified according to the Wentworth scale. This defines sand as being of diameter between 0.0625mm to 2mm. Material sizes larger than this are classified as gravel, subdivided into granular (2mm to 4 mm), pebble (4mm to 64 mm), cobble (64mm to 256 mm) and boulder (>256 mm). Rounded gravel, typical of a significant number of UK beaches, is referred to as shingle.
There are several physical properties of sand and gravel beaches which are important in the study of coastal sediment transport. The first is the sediment density (ρs), typically 2650 kg/m³ for quartz. The rest are required in recognition of the fact that a beach comprises a mixture of the beach material, interspersed with voids which may be filled with air or water. Thus the bulk density (ρb) is defined as the in situ mass of the mixture/volume of the mixture, the porosity (ps) as the volume of air or water/volume of the mixture, typically between 0.25 to 0.4 for a gravel beach, the voids ratio (e) as the volume of air or water/volume of the grains, typically between 0.33 to 0.66 for a gravel beach, and finally the angle of repose (Φ), which is the limiting slope angle at which the grains begin to roll, typically about 35° in air. In water this reduces to about 30°.
The material sizes on any particular beach will normally comprise a range of grain sizes, thus it is standard practice to measure the grain size distribution by a sieve analysis from which the percentage by weight of material passing through a range of sieve sizes is plotted against particle size. The median size is denoted by D50, representing the diameter for which 50% of the grains by mass are finer. The spread of sizes is often indicated by the values of D84 and D16 and their ratio is used to measure the degree of sorting. A well sorted sample is one in which there is a small range of sizes (D85/D16<2), whereas a well mixed sample has a large range of sizes (D85/D16>16).
Beaches types may be categorised according to the mixture of sands and gravels present, which has a significant influence on the beach slope and the more general morphological response of the beach to wave action. Four categories are defined as pure gravel (G), mixed sand and gravel (MSG), composite sand and gravel (CSG) and pure sand (S).
|© A. J. Chadwick|| Picture courtesy of
Halcrow Consulting Engineers
|© A. J. Chadwick||© A. J. Chadwick|
The characteristics of a gravel beach are very different from those of a sand beach. Most notably, gravel can support a steep gradient typically of the order of 1 in 8 with a tendency to form a near vertical berm towards the high water mark and a step at the wave break point. Swell wave conditions promote onshore accretion in the swash zone, with storm conditions promoting rapid offshore erosion. Despite the large grain size, the sediment is highly mobile. Changes in the vertical profile of the order of 0.5m are commonly found over just one tidal cycle for moderate to large waves .
|all pictures: © A. J. Chadwick|
|all pictures: © A. J. Chadwick|
On macro-tidal beaches, the active swash zone continuously re-works the beach face as the tide rises and falls. At low tide, it is common to observe a berm at the high water mark of the beach below which is a beach face of uniform slope, which ends in the step feature at the low water mark.
Cusp formation on gravel beaches is another distinctive feature. They can form rapidly when the wave approach is near normal, but are also washed out rapidly when the wave approach changes to an oblique angle. In the literature, two dominant models of cusp formation are recognised, namely edge wave forced and swash circulation/self organisation modes. However, cusp formation on gravel beaches has not been discussed very much in the literature .
|© A. J. Chadwick|
The steep beach gradient allows waves to progress much closer inshore before breaking, often resulting in a single plunging breaker. Consequently, there is minimal generation of infra-gravity waves. Even during storms, a wide surf zone is rare. An important consequence of this is that the swash zone can be of similar width to the surf zone and hence the sediment transport within the swash zone is of considerably more significance than on sand beaches. A second effect of the steep beach gradient is that refraction processes are also confined to a narrower zone than is experienced on a sand beach, with the result that refraction is often observed to be incomplete and the waves arrive at the beach face with some considerable angle, resulting in significant longshore transport. Gravel beaches are also much more reflective than sand beaches, with reflection coefficients of up to about 0.2.
Another distinguishing characteristic is the high permeability of gravel which, compared to a sand beach, increases the potential for infiltration during the swash uprush and exfiltration during the swash downrush. This induces a downward, stabilising force on sediment movement during the uprush and a lift force during backwash. Conversely, there is a thinning of the boundary layer during uprush, leading to increased shear stress on the bed and a thickening during backwash, leading to deceased shear stress on the bed. This latter effect is thought to predominate. On a gravel beach the backwash volume can also be considerably reduced, lowering the backwash velocities (see Elfrink and Baldock (2002)  for a detailed review). It is these processes that lead to the formation of the high water mark berm.
|Picture courtesy A. Pedrozo-Acuna|
Barrier beaches are a common geomorphological feature across the world, many of which are composed of gravel. Their essential features comprise a narrow, elongated ridge of sand or gravel existing slightly above the high tide level. The ridge generally extends parallel to the shore, but is separated from it by a wetland, lagoon or a tidal flat. Barrier beaches act as natural means of coast protection. In addition, wetlands and lagoons formed behind barrier beaches provide shelter for many coastal habitats and are therefore of considerable environmental significance. One explanation of their formation is that they have been formed by landward migration of submerged sand/shingle banks with rising sea levels since the last ice age.
Barrier beaches are constantly evolving in response to short and long term processes. Short term changes in barrier beaches are related to local wave and current climate, tidal variations, frequency and magnitude of storm events, barrier geometry and type of beach sediment and permeability. Over longer terms, the primary factors for change and modification of barrier beaches are sea level rise, longshore sediment transport and changes in sediment sources and/or sinks according to Orford et al. (1995) .
A barrier beach can respond to these factors by landward or seaward migration, reshaping and re-alignment and crest breakdown or build-up . The episodic processes of over-washing, over-topping and associated breaching are the primary phenomena behind long term evolution.
Understanding the processes of sediment transport on gravel beaches is important for beach management which requires some quantification of shoreline evolution. The vast majority of coastal engineering projects still rely on one-line models since, as yet, 3D morphodynamic models are restricted to short- and medium-term predictions and none have been validated against coarse-grained field data. Most one-line models make use of empirical total longshore transport equations. Hence, the formulation of a reliable estimate of longshore sediment transport rate remains of considerable practical importance in coastal engineering applications such as feasibility studies of port extensions, derivation of sediment budgets for coastal areas and the appraisal of long term beach stability.
To some extent, the mechanisms associated with the longshore transport of gravel may be differentiated from that of sand. Generally, for a sand seabed the oscillatory force due to the passage of a (breaking) wave will tend to stir the sediment into motion. The bed shear due to the longshore current can then transport the sand. On gravel beaches the sediment normally moves as bedload and is largely confined to the swash zone. As the flow in the uprush is perpendicular to the wave crest and in the backwash is perpendicular to the beach contours, the gravel describes a 'sawtooth', or zig-zag, path along the beach.
Quantitative estimation of sediment transport rates is extremely difficult on a gravel beach. Direct measurement of longshore transport has been attempted using a variety of techniques, such as deposition of a tracer material (radioactive, dyed or artificial sediment) or installation of traps (see Van Wellan et al. (2000)  for a review).
|all pictures: © A. J. Chadwick|
Changes in beach volumes may be calculated from data derived from ground or aerial surveys. If surveys are carried out over several years a trend for accretion or depletion may be discernible. This is not necessarily a direct measure of the longshore transport rate along the coast. Rather it is an indication of any imbalances in the supply of sediment from one point to another. However, where marine structures are constructed which cut of the supply from further up the coast, comparisons of beach volumes before and after construction can give some indication of the longshore transport rates.
|all pictures: © A. J. Chadwick|
The most widely used formula for calculating longshore transport is the CERC equation (US Army Corps of Engineers, 1984). The equation was derived from sand beaches and has been developed over a number of years. The formula is intended to include both bedload and suspended load and is usually given in the form of:
is the immersed weight sediment transport rate
is the longshore component of wave power
where E is wave energy, is group wave speed, θ is wave approach angle, subscript b refers to wave break point
and where K is a dimensionless empirically derived coefficient. The volumetric transport rate, , is related to by: where
where ρs is sediment density, ρ is sea water density, e is voids ratio.
There is no direct inclusion of the influence of grain size in the CERC equation, other than via the coefficient, K. It should be noted that for random waves, the choice of wave height used in the CERC equation (significant wave height, Hs or root mean square wave height, Hrms) must be correlated with the K value. Much confusion can arise, as some authors have used Hs and others Hrms without explicitly stating which one. For Rayleigh distributed waves, the K value using Hrms is twice that using Hs. A suggested value for K using Hrms is 0.77 for sand sized sediments. For gravel beaches, Chadwick’s (1989) data suggested a K value of 7% of that for sand (K=0.053). This was later found to work well at another beach site, Slapton Sands, Devon,UK (see Alegria-Arzaburu & Masselink (2010) ).
Chadwick (1991)  also developed a numerical model to predict longshore transport on gravel beaches. The hydrodynamic module uses the non-linear shallow water wave equations, which predict the instantaneous water levels and velocities throughout the surf and swash zones. These are combined with a sediment transport module based on Bagnold's stream power concept. Instantaneous transport rates across the surf and swash zones are subsequently summed in space and time to determine the total longshore transport rate. Thus, this model specifically includes a sediment threshold term and transport in the swash zone, both of which are of importance on shingle beaches. The model required calibration of only the friction coefficient, which was determined from field data. Subsequently, an algebraic formula (the Chadwick-Van Wellen formula) was derived from the numerical model results given by:
This equation was specifically designed for application to gravel beaches but has only been calibrated to the data from one field site. For further details of this and other longshore transport equations, applicable to gravel beaches, see Van Wellen et al (2000) .
Large scale experimental studies
|© A. J. Chadwick|
More recent work on coarse grained beaches was undertaken by the EU project “Large Scale Modelling of Coarse Grained Beaches” which was undertaken between March-May 2002. The experiment was conducted at full scale, thus avoiding the sediment scaling issues inherent in small scale models. The measurements included not only the wave field and resultant equilibrium profile development, but also detailed measurements of pore water pressures under the swash face. The experimental results of this work may be found in López de San Román-Blanco et al (2006) . This experiment was used to develop the cross shore profile model of Pedrozo et al (2006) , described in more detail in this article.
Subsequently another large scale experimental study of gravel barrier beaches was undertaken in BARDEX (Barrier Dynamics Experiment) in the Delta wave flume, the Netherlands, during June and July 2008. One unique aspect of this work was the inclusion of the effects of a back barrier lagoon in conjunction with a varying tidal level. A special edition of Coastal Engineering has been devoted to papers resulting from this work (see Turner and Masselink (2012)) . These include details of the observations, the effect of the lagoon water level on the beach profile, new measurements of and prediction techniques for wave friction factors, new predictive techniques for assessing barrier overwashing and overtopping and an assessment of the XBeach model used to predict beach profile evolution and the morphological effect of washover.
Parametric models for equilibrium profiles
The prediction of the expected profile for a gravel beach is very different from the concepts used for equilibrium profiles on a sand beach. The problem was first comprehensively addressed by van der Meer (1988)  and Powell (1990) , based on extensive scaled laboratory flume tests (small scale with anthracite in Powell’s case and large and small scale with gravel in van der Meer’s case). Powell’s work resulted in the development of a parametric profile model, which described the profile as a set of three curves: from the crest to the still water level, from the still water level to a transition point and from the transition point to the base of the profile. This was found to work well using the data from the GWK experiment ).
Parametric models for barrier stability
Bradbury (2000)  carried out a series of 3-D mobile bed laboratory tests on barrier crest response to hydrodynamic conditions and initial barrier geometry. Based on the model investigations, several categories of barrier response to hydrodynamic conditions were identified and underlying characteristics were qualitatively defined. These included crest raised by overtopping, crest lowered due to undermining of crest but with no overtopping, crest raised by over-washing with roll-back, crest lowered by over-washing with roll-back and finally, no change to the crest elevation with profile contained to seaward of the barrier crest.
He developed an expression for an over-washing threshold of barrier crests, based on regression analysis. It is a function of wave steepness (Hs/Lm), barrier free board (Rc) and barrier cross-sectional area Ba (above the still water line), given by:
The expression was validated against field data gathered at Hurst Spit, UK and found to be consistent with the field data. In addition, a conceptual model for barrier over-washing was formulated. According to his model, the beach will initially attempt to reach a dynamic equilibrium; if the critical barrier inertia is exceeded then the crest will be lowered by over-washing.
Modelling cross shore profile development
|Picture courtesy of A. Pedrozo-Acuna|
The first of several recent deterministic process based models for predicting the profile response of coarse grained beaches was developed by Lawrence, Chadwick and Fleming (2001) . It was shown that Boussinesq equations coupled with a bed load sediment transport formulation were a useful approach for process-based modelling of gravel beach profile evolution. This model was subsequently extended to model the sediment transport of grain size fractions and thus to predict sediment sorting across the beach face . However, it was found that this numerical model scheme was not stable on steep beaches.
Subsequently, using a newer Boussinesq model, Pedrozo et al (2006)  demonstrated that the two principle sediment parameters of friction (f) and sediment transport efficiency (C) were controlling the shape of the gravel beach profile. With f and C as constant values, accurate prediction of the profile evolution was not possible. The use of bigger friction factors in the uprush slightly improved the prediction. When larger values of the sediment transport efficiency (C -value) were used in the uprush compared to the backwash, better predictions of the beach profile resulted. The physical processes which dictate the differences between the predicted and measured profiles were hypothesised as being related to infiltration effects on the flow above the beach face and more accelerated flow in the uprush. Further developments coupling the effects of infiltration/exfiltration with sediment movement were still required at that time. The more recent results reported by Jamal et al (2010)  and Williams et al (2012)  indicate that including this process leads to significant improvements in prediction. Pedrozo et al (2010)  have also highlighted the importance of the impulsive pressures induced by plunging breakers on gravel beach sediment transport.
Suggestions for further research
For all budding researchers in coastal research, the further study of gravel and mixed beaches offers much opportunity to enhance our knowledge. Longshore transport prediction is still imprecise and cross shore processes very complex and not completely understood. Current parametric design methods leave much to be desired. Further field and large scale experimental studies remain a primary tool for advancing our understanding of long and cross shore processes. These will need to stand on the heads of the previously mentioned studies. Numerical modelling tools can still benefit greatly from improved process representation, including infiltration/exfiltration, interactions with groundwater flows, impulsive pressure forces, the incorporation of grain size fractions and the prediction of sediment sorting across the beach face.
Example barrier beaches
Chesil Beach, Dorset UK, is a world famous gravel barrier beach. It is approximately 28 kilometres long and, on average, 160 metres wide. The height of the beach is typically 11 metres above mean sea level. The beach stabilised close to its present position around 5000 years ago.
A rent research paper concerning the internal structure of Chesil beach (Bennett et al (2009))  also contains a good summary of the extensive historical literature on this beach. There is an informative web site at www.chesilbeach.org.
A comprehensive assessment of the historical development and contemporary processes affecting a significant gravel barrier beach system in the UK (Slapton Sands, South Devon UK) may be found in Chadwick et al (2005)  and a short summary of these studies is presented elsewhere in the coastal wiki (Slapton barrier beach case study, UK).
The paper includes assessment of the effects of sea level rise on barrier migration and its susceptibility to over-washing and overtopping, inter alia. It was found that the processes at work on the Slapton shoreline included:
|© A. J. Chadwick|
- Short-term changes in beach profile due to storms, acting over a period of several days. These storms cause cut-back of the seaward edge of the shingle crest, or changes in crest elevation
- Overtopping, in which wave action throws water and sediment onto the crest.
- Overflowing, or overwashing, where extremely high water levels coincident with wave action cause water to flow over the crest of the ridge. This can cause significant changes to the crest and backslope of the ridge.
- Medium-term changes in beach width and profile due to longshore transport, occurring over a period of months or several years.
- Long-term landward retreat; the barrier beach responds to sea level rise by “roll-over” and by increasing its crest height. This process involves overwashing, transferring sediment from the shore-face to the back barrier area. This is an episodic rather than a continuous process.
- Planform change; as the barrier beach is pinned by hard rock cliffs at either end (Strete and Torcross), landward retreat results in a gradual increase in both curvature and length.
In a later comprehensive field study of this site, Alegria-Arzuburu and Masselink (2010)  used an ARGUS video system to monitor short and medium term changes. This study confirmed many of the conclusions reached in the Chadwick study and demonstrated the importance of storm sequencing to both long and cross shore processes which affect beach erosion and accretion.
An up to date and comprehensive review of gravel beaches and barriers may be found in Anthony (2008) . Gravel beach dynamics are reviewed by Buscombe and Masselink (2006) . Stripling et al (2008)  present a good review of barrier beaches and their management.
Finally, the management manual (2010)  provides information on state-of-art methods, guidance on beach monitoring and maintenance, evaluation of the state and performance of a beach, design, procurement, execution and the after-care of beach improvement schemes. It also includes case studies to illustrate popular management techniques and draws from experience of existing management approaches.
- Risk and coastal zone policy: example from the Netherlands
- Shore protection, coast protection and sea defence methods
- The Integrated approach to Coastal Zone Management (ICZM)
- Natural causes of coastal erosion
- Human causes of coastal erosion
- Coastal defense techniques
- Natural barriers
- Relative sea level
- Shore nourishment
- ↑ 1,0 1,1 Buscome D., Masselink G. (2006). Concepts in gravel beach dynamics. Earth science Reviews 79 33-52.
- ↑ Fuller, R. M. & Randall, R. E. (1988). The Orford Shingles, Suffolk, UK. Classic conflicts in coastline management. Biological conservation.
- ↑ 3,0 3,1 Powell, K. A. (1990). Predicting short term profile response for shingle beaches. HR Wallingford Report SR 219.
- ↑ Diserens, A. P. & Coates, T. T. (1993). UK South Coast shingle beach study: storm response of shingle beaches. HR Wallingford Report SR 323.
- ↑ 5,0 5,1 CIRIA (2010). Beach management manual, Second Edition. Publication no. RP787, London. Available at: http://www.southerncoastalgroup.org.uk/bmm.htm Beach
- ↑ 6,0 6,1 6,2 Van Wellen, E, Chadwick, A J and Mason, T (2000) A review and assessment of longshore sediment transport equations for coarse grained beaches. Coastal Engineering, 40, 3, 243-275.
- ↑ 7,0 7,1 Anthony E. J. (2008). Gravel beaches and barriers. Developments in Marine Geology, Vol 4, 289-324.
- ↑ Elfrink B, Baldock T. (2002) Hydrodynamics and sediment transport in the swash zone: a review and perspectives. Coastal Engineering, 45, 149–167.
- ↑ Orford, J.D., Carter, R.W.G., Jennings, S.C. and Hinton, A.C. (1995). Processes and time scales by which a coastal gravel dominated barrier respond geomorphologically to sea level rise-Story Head Barrier, Nova-Scotia, Earth Surface process and Land Forms, 20(1), pp.21-37.
- ↑ Carter, R.W.G., Forbes, D.L., Jennings, S.C., Orford, J.D., Shaw, J. and Taylor, R.B., (2003), Barrier and lagoon coast evolution under differing relative sea level regimes-examples from Ireland and Nova-Scotia, Marine Geology, 88, Issue 3-4, pp.221-242.
- ↑ 11,0 11,1 Ruiz de Alegria-Arzaburu, A., Masselink, G. (2010). Storm response and beach rotation on a gravel beach, Slapton Sands, U.K Marine Geology 278, 77–99.
- ↑ Chadwick, A J. (1991). An unsteady flow bore model for sediment transport in broken waves Part 1: The development of the numerical model. Proc. Instn. Civ. Engrs. Part 2, 1991, 91, Dec. 719 - 737.
- ↑ Chadwick, A J. (1991). An unsteady flow bore model for sediment transport on broken waves Part II: The properties, calibration and testing of the numerical model. Proc. Instn. Civ. Engrs. Part 2, 1991, 91, Dec., 739-753.
- ↑ 14,0 14,1 López de San Román-Blanco, B., Coates, T., Holmes, P., Chadwick, A. J., Bradbury, A., Baldock, T., Pedrozo-Acuña, A., Grüne, J. (2006). Large scale experiments on gravel and mixed beaches: experimental procedure, data documentation and initial results. Coastal Engineering 53 (4), 349-363.
- ↑ 15,0 15,1 Pedrozo, A., Simmonds, D.J., Otta, A.K., Chadwick, A.J. (2006). On the cross-shore profile change of gravel beaches. Coastal Engineering, 53 (4), 335-347.
- ↑ Ian L. Turner, Gerd Masselink (2012). Coastal gravel barrier hydrology — Observations from a prototype-scale laboratory experiment (BARDEX). Coastal engineering, 63, 13-22
- ↑ Van der Meer J. (1988) Rock slopes and gravel beaches under wave attack. Delft Hydraulics Publications n 396.
- ↑ Bradbury, A.P. (2000), Predicting breaching of shingle barrier beaches- recent advances to aid beach management, 35th MAFF (DEFRA) Conf of River and Coastal Engineers.
- ↑ Lawrence, J, Chadwick, A J and Fleming, C A. (2001). A phase resolving model of sediment transport on coarse grained beaches. In: Billy L Edge (ed) Coastal Engineering 2000, 624-636. American Society of Civil Engineers: Reston, Virginia.
- ↑ Lawrence, J, Karunarathna, H, Chadwick, A J and Fleming, C A. (2003). Cross-shore sediment transport on mixed coarse grain sized beaches: modelling and measurements. Proceedings of the International Conference on Coastal Engineering 2002
- ↑ Jamal, M.H., Simmonds, D.J., Magar, V., Pan, S., (2010). Modelling infiltration on gravel beaches with an XBeach variant. Proc.32nd Conf. on Coastal Eng., Shanghai, China, 2010, sediment, p. 41 http://journals.tdl.org/ICCE/issue/view/154/showToc.
- ↑ Jon J. Williams, Amaia Ruiz de Alegría-Arzaburu, Robert T. McCall, Ap Van Dongeren (2012). Modelling gravel barrier profile response to combined waves and tides using XBeach: Laboratory and field results. Coastal engineering, 63, 62-80
- ↑ Pedrozo-Acuña, A., Torres-Freyermuth, A., Zou, Q., Hsu, T.-J., Reeve, D.E. (2010). Diagnostic modelling of impulsive pressures induced by plunging breakers. Coastal Engineering 57 (3), 252–266.
- ↑ Bennett M. R., Cassidy N. J., Pile J. (2009). Internal structure of a barrier beach as revealed by ground penetrating radar (GRP) Chesil beach, UK. Geomorphology 104, 218-229.
- ↑ Chadwick, A. J., Karunarathna, H., Gehrels, R, Massey, A. C.,O’Brien, D. ,Dales, D.(2005). A New Analysis of the Slapton Barrier Beach System. Maritime Engineering 158, 4, 147-161
- ↑ Stripling A., Bradbury, A.P., Brampton, A.H. and Cope S.N. (2008) Understanding Barrier Beaches Joint DEFRA/EA Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management R&D Programme. Technical Report FD1924/TR
Please note that others may also have edited the contents of this article.

At Walmart, we talk a lot about learning from one another and working in partnership to create global change. A recent report, “Smart Moves,” examines some of the best practices by companies working to cut emissions from transportation.
Emissions from freight transportation are no small problem. The report’s author, Jason Mathers of the Environmental Defense Fund, points out that freight emissions are expected “to increase 74 percent from 2005 to 2035” in the U.S. Mathers’ report looks at some of the best strategies and most creative thinking at work today to cut pollution caused by shipping.
Justin Gerdes’ Forbes commentary highlights the report and notes that “any CEO concerned about his or her company’s carbon footprint must account for shipping’s growing contribution to climate change…” As Gerdes points out, the report is loaded with statistics about shipping emissions as well as examples of smart moves by companies that reduced emissions and saved money at the same time. Here’s what he highlighted about Walmart:
Wal-Mart: Direct shipment
Wal-Mart worked with Minute Maid to eliminate one stop in the chain used to deliver Minute Maid’s Simply Orange Juice to Wal-Mart distribution centers. Now, the product moves directly from a production facility in Florida to Wal-Mart distribution centers. Eliminating delivery to Minute Maid’s own distribution centers slashed CO2 emissions by 1,500 metric tons annually and added six days to the shelf life of the orange juice.

What is Rainwater Harvesting?
Rainwater harvesting is an ancient practice of catching and holding rain for later use. In a rainwater harvesting system, rain is gathered from a building rooftop or other source and is held in large containers for future use, such as watering gardens or washing cars. This practice reduces the demand on water resources and is excellent during times of drought.
Why is it Important?
In addition to reducing the demand on our water sources (especially important during drought), rainwater harvesting also helps prevent water pollution. Surprised?
Here’s why: the success of the 1972 Clean Water Act has meant that the greatest threat to New York’s waterbodies comes not from industrial sources, but rather through the small actions we all make in our daily lives. For example, in a rain storm, the oil, pesticides, animal waste, and litter from our lawns, sidewalks, driveways, and streets are washed down into our sewers. This is called non-point source (NPS) pollution because the pollutants come from too many sources to be identified. Rainwater harvesting diverts water from becoming polluted stormwater; instead, this captured rainwater may be used to irrigate gardens near where it falls.
In New York City, keeping rainwater out of the sewer system is very important. That’s because the city has an old combined sewer system that uses the same pipes to transport both household waste and stormwater to sewage treatment plants. During heavy rains, the system overloads; then untreated sewage and contaminated stormwater overflow into our rivers and estuary, with serious consequences:
Who is Harvesting Rainwater in New York City?
Back in 2002, a drought emergency pushed many community gardens to the brink of extinction. For the first time in twenty years, community gardeners were denied permission to use fire hydrants, the primary source of water for most community gardens. This crisis led to the formation of the Water Resources Group (WRG), an open collaboration of community gardening and environmental organizations. With help from the WRG, rainwater harvesting systems have now been built as demonstration sites in twenty NYC community gardens.
At community gardens that harvest rainwater, rain is diverted from the gutters of adjacent buildings and is stored in tanks in the gardens. A 1-inch rainfall on a 1,000-square-foot roof produces 600 gallons of water. The tanks are mosquito proof, so the standing water does not encourage West Nile virus. Because rainwater is chlorine free, it is better than tap water for plant growth, meaning healthier plants. And it’s free!
What are Other Cities Doing?
Many cities have adopted creative, low-cost ways to stop wasting rainwater by diverting it from their sewage systems and putting it to use where it falls. Here are some examples:
What Can I Do?
Spread the word! Educate those around you on the importance of lifestyle decisions.
Tell people not to litter, dump oil down storm drains, or overfertilize their lawns.
Install a rainwater harvesting system at your home, school, business, or local community center.
Contact your local elected officials, and let them know you support rainwater harvesting!
Supporting rainwater harvesting Jade Boat Loans

Students at a local college walked around campus Tuesday without shoes on and it was all for a good cause.
Bowling Green Technical College held a "One Day Without Shoes" event.
It's meant to raise awareness for the millions of children around the World who don't have proper footwear and are therefore, exposed to disease and injuries.
Students and community members walked over a gravel pathway barefoot at the event.
"People are not really aware that kids go daily without shoes. Roughly, 30,000 children just in the area are going without shoes," says John Rose, one of the event's coordinators.
"I think it's a good awareness and it shows people what kids go through every day," says Haley Womac, a student at BGTC.
Those who took part also got the chance to get pedicures.
Organizers say the Philippines and Kenya are just two of the countries where many children go without shoes.

What is Morbid Obesity?
Obesity becomes "morbid" when it reaches the point of significantly increasing the risk of one or more obesity-related health conditions or serious diseases (also known as co-morbidities) that result either in significant physical disability or even death. As you read about morbid obesity you may also see the term "clinically severe obesity" used. Both are descriptions of the same condition and can be used interchangeably. Morbid obesity is typically defined as being 100 lbs. or more over ideal body weight or having a Body Mass Index of 40 or higher. According to the National Institutes of Health Consensus Report, morbid obesity is a serious disease and must be treated as such. It is a chronic disease, meaning that its symptoms build slowly over an extended period of time.

What Your Cholesterol Level Means
How’s your cholesterol? Time to get it checked!??
Keeping your cholesterol levels healthy is a great way to keep your heart healthy – and lower your chances of getting heart disease or having a stroke. Cholesterol can be tricky to understand, though, because not all is bad for you. Some is actually good for you. The most important thing you can do as a first step is to know your cholesterol numbers by getting your cholesterol tested. Here are some easy ways for you to understand what the testing involves, how it can help you and ways to improve your health by improving your cholesterol.??
The American Heart Association endorses the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) guidelines for detection of high cholesterol: All adults age 20 or older should have a fasting lipoprotein profile — which measures total cholesterol, LDL (bad) cholesterol, HDL (good) cholesterol and triglycerides — once every five years. This test is done after a nine- to 12-hour fast without food, liquids or pills. It gives information about total cholesterol, LDL (bad) cholesterol, HDL (good) cholesterol and triglycerides (View an animation of cholesterol).??
Your test report will show your cholesterol levels in milligrams per deciliter of blood (mg/dL). To determine how your cholesterol levels affect your risk of heart disease, your doctor will also take into account other risk factors such as age, family history, smoking and high blood pressure.??
A complete fasting lipoprotein profile will show the following four results.?
Your Cholesterol Levels
Your Total Blood (or Serum) Cholesterol Level
|Total Cholesterol Level||Category|
|Less than 200 mg/dL||Desirable level that puts you at lower risk for coronary heart disease. A cholesterol level of 200 mg/dL or higher raises your risk.|
|200 to 239 mg/dL||Borderline high|
|240 mg/dL and above||High blood cholesterol. A person with this level has more than twice the risk of coronary heart disease as someone whose cholesterol is below 200 mg/dL.|
Above content provided by Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.
For advice about your medical care, consult your doctor.

Save money with properly inflated tires
(NewsUSA) - Tire pressure monitoring systems (TPMS) are now a standard safety feature on all new cars in the United States. TPMS automatically monitors tire pressure and alerts the driver when the pressure in one or more tires becomes significantly low -- and potentially dangerous.
Still, conducting monthly tire pressure checks is one of the smartest driving moves you can make. Not only are properly inflated tires critical for vehicle safety, they also increase fuel efficiency and reduce carbon dioxide emissions.
Increase Fuel Efficiency
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, 3.56 million gallons of gasoline are wasted every day due to incorrectly inflated tires. The good news is you can improve gas mileage just by keeping tires inflated to the proper pressure. In fact, one study showed that if gas costs $3 per gallon, proper tire pressure can save you up to $432 at the pump each year.
Reduce Carbon Dioxide Emissions
According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the typical car in the United States releases more than five tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere each year. By keeping tires properly inflated, you can reduce your vehicle's "carbon footprint" by an average of 327 pounds per year. Because a tire can lose up to half its air pressure without appearing to be under-inflated, you cannot rely on a tire's appearance to determine whether it's properly inflated or not.
Tire Pressure Tips
To help ensure your tires are properly inflated year-round, here are some tips from Schrader, a manufacturer of TPMS:
* Check the pressure in all four tires -- and the spare tire -- monthly with an accurate tire gauge, and always check tire pressure before a long road trip.
* The "right" pressure for your vehicle's tires can be found in the vehicle's manual or on the driver door edge, glove box or fuel door. Do not follow the information listed on the tire sidewall.
* For the most accurate reading, tires should be checked when they are cool.
* Always remember to replace the valve cap.
Distributed by Internet Broadcasting. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Streptococcus, Group B
It is possible that the main title of the report Streptococcus, Group B is not the name you expected. Please check the synonyms listing to find the alternate name(s) and disorder subdivision(s) covered by this report.
- Group B Streptococcal Septicemia of the Newborn
- Lancefield Group B Streptococcus
- Sepsis of the Newborn
- Streptococcus Agalactiae
- Infant Early-Onset Streptococcus, Group B
- Infant Late-Onset Streptococcus, Group B
- Adult Onset Streptococcus, Group B
Group B streptococcus (group B strep) is a type of bacteria that causes infection among newborns, pregnant women or women after childbirth, females after gynecologic surgery, and older male and female patients with other serious diseases.
Group B strep remains the most common cause among newborns (neonates) of infection of the blood (septicemia) and of the brain (meningitis). The responsible bacterium, usually S. agalactiae, may be found most often in the vagina and rectum of females and may be transmitted sexually, as well as to a fetus as the infant passes through the birth canal.
Group B strep infection of newborns may be prevented by giving pregnant women who are carriers antibiotics through the vein (intravenously) during labor. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend that any pregnant woman who has had a baby with group B strep disease in the past, who has a bladder (urinary tract) infection caused by group B strep, or who tests positive for group B strep during pregnancy should receive antibiotics during labor.
Prevention and prompt treatment are important because group B strep infections may become life-threatening among newborns.
GBS disease is said to be early onset if it is obvious within the first week of life. It is said to be late onset if the disease is evident after the first week of life and before the end of the first three months. Those at greatest risk of GBS disease are newborn children of infected mothers, women after childbirth, females after gynecologic surgery and older male and female patients with other serious diseases.
Group B Strep Association
P.O. Box 16515
Chapel Hill, NC 27516
Center for Disease Control and Prevention
1600 Clifton Road NE
Atlanta, GA 30333
NIH/National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
Office of Communications and Government Relations
6610 Rockledge Drive, MSC 6612
Bethesda, MD 20892-6612
MUMS National Parent-to-Parent Network
150 Custer Court
Green Bay, WI 54301-1243
Genetic and Rare Diseases (GARD) Information Center
PO Box 8126
Gaithersburg, MD 20898-8126

Heart Disease and Abnormal Heart Rhythm (Arrhythmia)
An irregular heartbeat is called an arrhythmia, which is not the same as an irregular heart rate. In fact, the two don't necessarily occur together.
A normal heart rate is 50 to 100 beats per minute. Arrhythmias can occur with a normal heart rate, or with heart rates that are slow or rapid. In the United States, more than 850,000 people are hospitalized for an arrhythmia each year.
What Causes an Arrhythmia?
Arrhythmias may be caused by many different factors, including:
Irregular heart rhythms can also occur in otherwise normal, healthy hearts.
What Are the Types of Arrhythmias?
The types of arrhythmias include:
Premature atrial contractions. These are early extra beats that originate in the atria (upper chambers of the heart). They are harmless and generally do not require treatment.
Premature ventricular contractions(PVCs). These are among the most common arrhythmias and occur in people with or without heart disease. This is the skipped heartbeat we all occasionally experience. In some people, it can be related to stress, too much caffeine or nicotine, or too much exercise. But sometimes, PVCs can be caused by heart disease or electrolyte imbalance. People who have a lot of PVCs, and/or symptoms associated with them, should be evaluated by a heart doctor. However, in most people, PVCs are usually harmless and rarely need treatment.
Atrial fibrillation. Atrial fibrillation is a very common irregular heart rhythm that causes the atria, the upper chambers of the heart, to contract abnormally.
Atrial flutter. This is an arrhythmia caused by one or more rapid circuits in the atrium. Atrial flutter is usually more organized and regular than atrial fibrillation. This arrhythmia occurs most often in people with heart disease and in the first week after heart surgery. It often converts to atrial fibrillation.
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT). A rapid heart rate, usually with a regular rhythm, originating from above the ventricles. PSVT begins and ends suddenly. There are two main types: accessory path tachycardias and AV nodal reentrant tachycardias (see below).
Accessory pathway tachycardias. A rapid heart rate due to an extra abnormal pathway or connection between the atria and the ventricles. The impulses travel through the extra pathways as well as through the usual route. This allows the impulses to travel around the heart very quickly, causing the heart to beat unusually fast.
AV nodal reentrant tachycardia. A rapid heart rate due to more than one pathway through the AV node. It can cause heart palpitations, fainting, or heart failure. In some cases, it can be terminated using simple maneuvers, such as breathing in and bearing down. Some drugs can also stop this heart rhythm.
Ventricular tachycardia (V-tach). A rapid heart rhythm originating from the lower chambers (or ventricles) of the heart. The rapid rate prevents the heart from filling adequately with blood. This can be a serious arrhythmia, especially in people with heart disease, and may be associated with more symptoms.
Ventricular fibrillation. An erratic, disorganized firing of impulses from the ventricles. The ventricles quiver and are unable to contract or pump blood to the body. This is a medical emergency that must be treated with cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and defibrillation as soon as possible.
Long QT syndrome. The QT interval is the area on the electrocardiogram that represents the time it takes for the heart muscle to contract and then recover, or for the electrical impulse to fire impulses and then recharge. When the QT interval is longer than normal, it increases the risk of a life-threatening form of ventricular tachycardia. Long QT syndrome is an inherited condition that can cause sudden death in young people. It can be treated with antiarrhythmic drugs, pacemaker, electrical cardioversion, defibrillation, implanted cardioverter/defibrillator, or ablation therapy.
Bradyarrhythmias. These are slow heart rhythms, which may arise from disease in the heart's electrical conduction system. Examples include sinus node dysfunction and heart block.
Sinus node dysfunction. A slow heart rhythm due to an abnormal sinus node. Significant sinus node dysfunction that causes symptoms is treated with a pacemaker.
Heart block. A delay or complete block of the electrical impulse as it travels from the sinus node to the ventricles. The heart may beat irregularly and, often, more slowly. If serious, heart block is treated with a pacemaker.

Westat has applied our strong statistical, environmental, and data collection skills to design, conduct, and analyze environmental studies for more than 25 years. We have applied national field resources to the collection of environmental samples in homes, schools, and industrial facilities and coordinated analyses at specialized laboratories, following EPA's and our own quality assurance specifications.
National Children's Study (NCS)
Westat has been awarded the contract to serve as the coordinating center for the National Children's Study (NCS) — the largest study ever undertaken within the United States to assess the effects of the environment on child and adult health. The full nationwide study would follow more than 100,000 children from prior to conception through adulthood, seeking information to prevent and treat such health problems as autism, birth defects, diabetes, heart disease, and obesity. Westat will collect data, compile and analyze statistics, and ensure that the study proceeds according to design.
Environmental measures proposed for inclusion in the study include toxicants in air, water, and household dust and body burden data to be collected from urine, saliva, and blood. Toxicants to be studied include pesticides, metals, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), phytoestrogens, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and more.
Six Vanguard Centers have been selected to pilot and complete the first phases of the study. The centers, which include a variety of universities, hospitals, health departments, and other organizations, will work within their communities to recruit participants, collect and process data, and pilot new research methods for incorporation into the full study.
NCS is led by a consortium of Federal agency partners: the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (including the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences at the National Institutes of Health, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Exposure Assessment and Environmental Epidemiology
Our work in the area of exposure assessment and environmental epidemiology has included studies of exposure to pesticides, particulate matter, PCBs, heavy metals, and volatile organic compounds in a variety of populations, including children, the elderly, and the immunocompromised. Westat conducted the National Human Exposure Assessment Regional Survey in Maryland, a multimedia, multicontaminant field study of long-term exposure that included the collection of blood and urine samples for environmental exposure. The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey now includes measurements of environmental exposure to dozens of contaminants through sampling of blood, urine, hair, and other body tissues and fluids. Other Westat environmental epidemiology studies include studies of the health effects relating to the following exposures:
- Air pollution among the elderly in Maryland and California and school children in California and Texas;
- Pesticides among children throughout the United States;
- Microbial pathogens among bathers in recreational water;
- Mercury in the seafood consumed by subsistence fishermen and women of childbearing age;
- Indoor allergens in the homes and daycare centers of children throughout the United States; and
- Asbestos in homes, schools, and commercial buildings throughout the United States.
Water Quality has been the focus of several projects for the EPA. Westat has performed the following:
- Evaluated the best technology available for minimizing the adverse environmental impact of cooling water intake structures;
- Analyzed water quality impairment from concentrated animal feeding operations; and
- Designed, conducted, and analyzed the results of industry surveys to determine whether current effluent guidelines were appropriate for current manufacturing technologies used in the iron and steel, meat products, and aquaculture industries.
Westat's work in the area of lead hazards has included two national surveys of lead-based paint hazards in housing, an assessment of exposure to lead in child-care centers and homes, and the analysis of data on lead levels in soil. Our staff has performed the following:
- Produced technical guidance documents on lead contamination of various media (soil, water, and dust);
- Developed risk communication materials for the general public;
- Designed a series of examinations to certify lead inspections;
- Evaluated training programs designed to train janitors and others to work safely around lead paint; and
- Designed a protocol for measuring the blood lead levels of children living in remediated housing.
Health and Environment Chapter of the EPA's State of the Environment Report
Westat assisted EPA in preparing the health and environment chapter of the EPA's State of the Environment Report. Written in a style appropriate for the general public, yet in conformance with the standards of the health and environmental research communities, the report addresses the following:
- Health status of the U.S. population;
- Human exposure to environmental pollutants;
- Diseases related to environmental pollution; and
- Data gaps and emerging issues.
Hazardous Waste Survey
For the EPA's Office of Solid Waste, Westat designed and implemented the Hazardous Waste Survey. This national industry survey provided important information about the characteristics of waste generation, treatment, storage, and disposal facilities and the quantities of hazardous waste produced.

by Bruce Boyers,
Our system of factory agriculture is exacting a great toll on our planet: 40 percent of the land and 70 percent of the fresh water on Earth is devoted to the growing of food, which, in the process, creates some 30 percent of greenhouse gases. Compounding these issues is the fact that commercial produce is often transported thousands or even tens of thousands of miles to its point of sale, consuming tons of fossil fuel. It is evident that our current agricultural model is a failed experiment in search of a more sustainable solution.
In an effort to bring needed fresh produce closer to home with far greater sustainability, a movement in urban agriculture is rapidly gaining momentum. New York City, having such a large and diverse population, is a metropolis ripe for green urban agriculture and is now home to an innovative commercial operation called Gotham Greens.
Gotham Greens has now gone into full production and is providing much-needed locally and sustainably grown produce for the greater New York City area. "My partners and I had a vision for a local farm operation here in New York City that could provide New Yorkers-which would include restaurants, retailers and consumers-with premium quality, fresh, nutritious culinary herbs and greens, salad greens and lettuces," Puri said. "They would be grown year round so that we could reliably and consistently supply our customers with local produce. Obviously our climate in New York doesn't support year-round agriculture of a lot of these crops, so we thought we would try to do something in a greenhouse. A greenhouse climate allows you to potentially grow year round, at the same time protecting crops against extreme or detrimental weather events."
Gotham Greens was founded in 2008 by Puri and Eric Haley; then in 2009 Jennifer Nelkin joined as a partner to head all greenhouse operations. Puri himself had previously developed and managed start-up enterprises in New York City, in Ladakh, India, and in Malawi, Africa, focusing on green building, renewable energy and environmental design. Haley, who is currently employed by a Manhattan-based investment bank and private equity fund, also brought business acumen to the operation. The farm know-how comes from Nelkin, who cultivated her expertise in greenhouse systems and management at the University of Arizona. In addition to greenhouse system design, her skillset includes plant nutrition and crop and pest management. She has managed greenhouses in far more extreme circumstances than New York-namely two different locations in Antarctica, providing fresh vegetables for US research scientists.
House of Greens
The choice of a rooftop was made quite deliberately. "New York City obviously doesn't have a lot of arable or available land, so it seemed to us that one underutilized resource was rooftops," said Puri. "You're seeing more and more innovative uses of the rooftops now in urban areas nationwide."
Getting a rooftop greenhouse up and operational-especially one of this size and scope-was no mean feat. "It was extremely challenging," Puri recalled. "I would say the biggest challenge was just having any real path to follow. There's not a lot of precedent for what we're doing.
"The first thing was finding a building owner who wouldn't mind us building a greenhouse on his or her roof. We also had to find a building that met all the construction criteria, both structurally and for the obtaining of utilities. In addition there had to be access, and the evaluation of how we would get stuff up and how we would get stuff down. On top of that we had to make sure the plan would meet all zoning and building codes."
The Gotham Greens operation, as one might imagine, represents an enormous saving in resource usage. "We employ a recirculating hydroponic technique that actually goes back and captures all irrigation for reuse," Puri explained. "It's the most water-efficient form of agriculture in the world. We use ten times less water than conventional agriculture. Even though we are not in an area that is susceptible to drought, we still think that it's a great demonstration of a technology that is very water efficient." The hydroponic growing environment is sterile as well, which eliminates the risk of pathogens-particularly important in light of the increase in foodborne illnesses, such as E. coli and salmonella, from fresh vegetables.
Puri and his partners have seen to the frugal use of energy too. "We have 55 kilowatts in solar panels that produce electricity to help meet the electrical needs of the facility," said Puri. "Along with that, we've spent a lot of effort here to design our facilities to be as energy efficient as possible. We've installed increased insulation in many areas; the glazing material that we selected helps insulate the greenhouse; and we've deployed heat curtains and heat blankets in the winter to reduce space in the greenhouse that needs to be conditioned." Additionally, a sophisticated computer control system ensures that climate-control equipment operates efficiently to reduce resource consumption.
Perhaps the most significant saving in terms of resources is that of fossil fuels, as the distance from farm to consumer is considerably shorter. "Of course, we sharply reduce the transportation of our product and the associated carbon emissions that are caused because of that," Puri added.
All nutrition and pest control is done naturally and sustainably, which was also one of the goals for Gotham Greens. "We utilize mineral salts that we dissolve in the water," Puri said. "These contain minerals such as nitrogen, magnesium and potassium, along with micronutrients like selenium. In controlling pests, we mostly rely on beneficial insects; there's a whole program in integrated pest management for which a fair bit of monitoring goes on. If we do find a pest in here, we will introduce its natural predator-for instance, we have ladybugs and lacewings to control aphids."
It's in the Taste
Like many others concentrating on great flavor, Puri and his team have found that truly caring for the plants will result in the superiority they seek. "The biggest thing in obtaining that flavor is really taking care of our crops-making sure they have ideal growing conditions in climate, humidity, temperature, and so forth. We're also making sure they're getting all the nutrients that they need, along with the right amount of irrigation, the right amount of dissolved oxygen. The foremost belief is that healthy plants are going to make for tastier plants.
"And then because we are so close to our customers, we never have to harvest anything before it's completely ready. Many conventionally grown crops have to be refrigerated and transported long distances, so they are picked early and then artificially ripened. We don't have to do anything like that; we can harvest crops when they are at their optimal freshness, size, flavor, profile and color. We can harvest any item in the morning and have it to a supermarket or a restaurant in the afternoon."
In addition to supplying locally grown produce, Gotham Greens contributes to the local economy by providing badly needed jobs. All staff are residents from the nearby community. As production expands, they also plan to offer their products to more local areas that have limited access to fresh produce.
They're Buying It
For more information on Gotham Greens, visit www.gothamgreens.com.
|Printable Version||E-mail a Friend|

(1) The section of a pedestal between base and surbase. (2) The lower portion of the wall of a room, decorated diffrently from the upper section.
The dance of death, a favorite late medieval picture subject. It generally shows skeletons forcing the living to dance with them, usually in matching pairs, e.g. a live priest dancing with a skeleton priest. Holbein's woodcut series the Dance of Death is one of the most famous.
Refers to a style of painting that developed in Regensburg, Germany, and elsewhere along the Danube river during the Renaissance and Reformation. It is characterized by a renewed interest in medieval piety, an expressive use of nature, the relationship of the human figure and events to nature, and the introduction of landscape as a primary theme in art. The term was coined by Theodor von Frimmel (1853-1928), who believed that painting in the Danube River region around Regensburg, Passau, and Linz possessed common characteristics; the style seems to exist even though leading artists did not form a school in the usual sense of the term, since they did not work in a single workshop or in a particular centre. Major artists whose work represents the style include Lucas Cranach the Elder, Albrecht Altdorfer and Wolf Huber.
a minister who was below the rank of priest in the Catholic, Anglican and Orthodox churches. Deacons originally cared for both the sick and the poor in early Christian communities.
the representation of Christ enthroned in glory as judge or ruler of the world, flanked by the Virgin Mary and John the Baptist acting as intercessors.
in medieval art a picture, often an altarpiece, consisting of two folding wings without a fixed central area.
In Renaissance art theory, the design of a painting seen in terms of drawing, which was help to be the basis of all art. The term stresses not the literal drawing, but the concept behind an art work. With the Mannerists the term came to mean an ideal image that a work attempts to embody but can in fact never fully realize. As disegno appeals to the intellect, it was considered far more important that coloure (colour), which was seen as appealing to the senses and emotions.
A technique of painting in which pigments are diluted with water and bound with a glue. It was usually used for painting wall decorations and frescoes, though a few artists, notably Andrea Mantegna (1430/31-1506), also used it on canvas.
in architecture, hemispherical structure evolved from the arch, usually forming a ceiling or roof.
A Roman Catholic order of mendicant friars founded by St. Dominic in 1216 to spread the faith through preaching and teaching. The Dominicans were one of the most influential religious orders in the later Middle Ages, their intellectual authority being established by such figures as Albertus Magnus and St.Thomas Aquinas. The Dominicans played the leading role in the Inquisition.
a patron who commissioned a work of art for a church. Donors sometimes had their portraits included in the work they were donating as a sign of piety.
A male garment, formerly worn under armour, that from the 15th century referred to a close-fitting jacket.
A ceramic product invented in England around 1720, which belongs to the category of fine stoneware. The porous white bodies are made of fired raw materials containing clay and kaolin as well as quartz, feldspar, and talc. A transparent glaze is applied upon the first or second firing. Earthenware, which is suitable for everyday use, is distinguished by its light, creamy surface. The most famous example of this category is made by the English firm of Wedgwood (since 1780).
Stand on which a painting is supported while the artist works on it. The oldest representation of an easel is on an Egyptian relief of the Old Kingdom (c. 2600-2150 BC). Renaissance illustrations of the artist at work show all kinds of contrivances, the commonest being the three-legged easel with pegs, such as we still use today. Light folding easels were not made until the 18th and 19th centuries, when painters took to working out of doors. The studio easel, a 19th-century invention, is a heavy piece of furniture, which runs on castors or wheels, and served to impress the c1ients of portrait painters. Oil painters need an easel which will support the canvas almost vertically or tip it slightly forward to prevent reflection from the wet paint, whereas the watercolourist must be able to lay his paper nearly flat so that the wet paint will not run down. The term 'easel-painting' is applied to any picture small enough to have been painted on a standard easel.
The words of Pontius Pilate in the Gospel of St. John (19, 5) when he presents Jesus to the crowds. Hence, in art, a depiction of Jesus, bound and flogged, wearing a crown of thorns and a scarlet robe.
In portraiture, a pose in which the sitter faces the viewer directly; full face.
Coloured glass in powder form and sometimes bound with oil, which is bonded to a metal surface or plaque by firing.
A print made from a metal plate that has had a design cut into it with a sharp point. Ink is smeared over the plate and then wiped off, the ink remaining in the etched lines being transferred when the plate is pressed very firmly onto a sheet of paper.
A combining of several media grouped together to form a composite art work. Chapels were among the most notable Renaissance ensembles, sometimes combining panel painting, fresco, sculpture, and architecture.
In classical architecture, the part of a building between the capitals of the columns and the roof. It consists of the architrave, the frieze, and the cornice.
Pictures or tables with reliefs and inscriptions erected in honour of the deceased in churches or sepulchral chapels.
the science of the end of the world and beginning of a new world, and of the last things,death and resurrection.
the sacrament of Holy Communion, celebrated with bread and wine, the most sacred moment of the Christian liturgy.
The term is used in an Italian context to designate spiritual currents manifest around 1540 which might be said to have occupied the confessional middle ground between Catholicism and Protestantism; hence it does not relate at all to the term 'Evangelical' as used in German or English contexts. It has been applied particularly to the so-called spirituali of the Viterbo circle, notably Cardinal Pole, Vittoria Colonna, Marcantonio Flaminio, Carnesecchi and Ochino, and also to Giulia Gonzaga, Contarini, Giovanni Morone; Gregorio Cortese and Vermigli. Such persons combined a zeal for personal religious renewal with spiritual anxieties akin to those of Luther, to which they sought an answer in the study of St Paul and St Augustine; convinced of the inefficacy of human works, they stressed the role of faith and the all-efficacy of divine grace in justification. Few of them broke with the Catholic Church.
Tin-glazed European earthenware, particularly ware made in France, Germany, Spain, and Scandinavia. It developed in France in the early 16th century, was influenced by the technique and the designs of Italian maiolica, and is named for Faenza, Italy, which was famous for maiolica. It is distinguished from tin-glazed earthenware made in Italy, which is called "maiolica," and that made in the Netherlands and England, which is called "delftware." It has no connection to the ancient objects or material also named faience, which was developed in the Near East ca. 4500 BCE.
A title given to those leaders of the early Christian Church whose writings had made an important contribution to the development of doctrine. Saints Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, and Gregory the Great were often considered the four principal Fathers of the Church.
Ancient Roman god of nature, protector of shepherds, farmers, fields and livestock. Equated with the Greek god Pan, he is frequently depicted with a goats legs and horns.
Architectural ornaments consisting of fruit, leaves, and flowers suspended in a loop; a swag.
In painting, representation of a rural feast or open-air entertainment. Although the term fête galante ("gallant feast") is sometimes used synonymously with fête champêtre, it is also used to refer to a specific kind of fête champêtre: a more graceful, usually aristocratic scene in which groups of idly amorous, relaxed, well-dressed figures are depicted in a pastoral setting.
of a column or pillar, carved with closely spaced parallel grooves cut vertically.
the Four Horsemen in the Revelation of St John (Rev 6, 2 - 8), which contains the description of the end of the world and the Second Coming of Christ. The Horsemen personify the disasters about to happen to mankind, such as plague, war, famine and death. Their attributes are the bow, sword and set of balances. In some sculptures the first rider is identified as Christ by a halo. The colour of his horse is white, that of the others red, black and dun.
A Roman Catholic order of mendicant friars founded by St. Francis of Assisi (given papal approval in 1223). Committed to charitable and missionary work, they stressed the veneration of the Holy Virgin, a fact that was highly significant in the development of images of the Madonna in Italian art. In time the absolute poverty of the early Franciscans gave way to a far more relaxed view of property and wealth, and the Franciscans became some of the most important patrons of art in the early Renaissance.
Wall painting technique in which pigments are applied to wet (fresh) plaster (intonaco). The pigments bind with the drying plaster to form a very durable image. Only a small area can be painted in a day, and these areas, drying to a slightly different tint, can in time be seen. Small amounts of retouching and detail work could be carried out on the dry plaster, a technique known as a secco fresco.
Save in Venice, where the atmosphere was too damp, fresco painting was the habitual way of decorating wall surfaces in Italy, both in churches and in private and public palaces. During the 16th century a liking for the more brilliant effect of large canvases painted in oils, and to a lesser extent for tapestries, diminished the use of frescoes save for covering upper walls, covings and ceilings. The technique of buon fresco, or true fresco, involved covering the area with a medium-fine plaster, the intonaco, just rough enough to provide a bond (sometimes enhanced by scoring) for the final layer of fine plaster. Either a freehand sketch of the whole composition (sinopia) was drawn on the wall, or a full-scale cartoon was prepared and its outlines transferred to the intonaco by pressing them through with a knife or by pouncing - blowing charcoal dust through prickholes in the paper. Then over the intonaco enough of the final thin layer was applied to contain a day's work. That portion of the design was repeated on it either by the same methods or freehand, and the artist set to work with water-based pigments while the plaster was still damp; this allowed them to sink in before becoming dry and fixed. (Thus 'pulls' or slices of frescoes could be taken by later art thieves without actually destroying the colour or drawing of the work.) It is usually possible to estimate the time taken to produce a fresco by examining the joins between the plastered areas representing a day's work. Final details, or effects impossible to obtain in true fresco pigments, could be added at the end in 'dry' paints, or fresco secco, a technique in which pigment was laid on an unabsorbent plaster; the best known example of an entire composition in fresco secco is Leonardo's Last Supper.
The highest order the English monarch can bestow. It was founded by Edward III in 1348. The blue Garter ribbon is worn under the left knee by men and on the upper left arm by women. The motto is Honi soit qui mal y pense (Evil to those who think evil).
in classical Rome, a person's invisible tutelary god. In art from the classical period onwards, the low-ranking god was depicted as a winged, usually childish figure.
In a broad sense, the term is used to mean a particular branch or category of art; landscape and portraiture, for example, are genres of painting, and the essay and the short story are genres of literature.
The depiction of scenes from everyday life. Elements of everyday life had long had a role in religious works; pictures in which such elements were the subject of a painting developed in the 16th century with such artists as Pieter Bruegel. Then Carracci and Caravaggio developed genre painting in Italy, but it was in Holland in the 17th century that it became an independent form with its own major achievements, Vermeer being one of its finest exponents.
A term applied to the 14th-century followers of Giotto. The best-known of the 'Giotteschi' are the Florentines Taddeo Gaddi, Maso di Banco, Bernardo Daddi, and to a lesser extent the Master of St Cecilia. Giotto's most loyal follower was Maso, who concentrated on the essential and maintained the master's high seriousness.
French term used from the 15th century onwards for a lying or recumbent effigy on a funerary monument. The gisant typically represented a person in death (sometimes decomposition) and the gisant position was contrasted with the orant, which represented the person as if alive in a kneeling or praying position. In Renaissance monuments gisants often formed part of the lower register, where the deceased person was represented as a corpse, while on the upper part he was represented orant as if alive.
paint applied so thinly that the base beneath it is visible through the layer.
(1) The supernatural radiance surrounding a holy person.
(2) To have the distinction of one's deeds recognized in life and to be revered for them posthumously: this was glory. The nature of true gloria was much discussed, whether it must be connected with the public good, whether the actions that led to it must conform with Christian ethics, how it differed from notoriety. The concept did not exclude religious figures (the title of the church of the Frari in Venice was S. Maria Gloriosa), but it was overwhelmingly seen in terms of secular success and subsequent recognition, as determining the lifestyles of the potent and the form of their commemoration in literature, in portraits and on tombs. As such, it has been taken as a denial of medieval religiosity ('sic transit gloria mundi'), and thus a hallmark of Renaissance individual ism; as a formidable influence on cultural patronage; and as spurring on men of action, as well as writers and artists, to surpass their rivals - including their counterparts in antiquity.
French tapestry manufactory, named after a family of dyers and clothmakers who set up business on the outskirts of Paris in the 15th century. Their premises became a tapestry factory in the early 17th century, and in 1662 it was taken over by Louis XIV, who appointed Lebrun Director. Initially it made not only tapestries but also every kind of product (except carpets, which were woven at the Savonnerie factory) required for the furnishing of the royal palaces — its official title was Manufacture royale des meubles de la Couronne. The celebrated tapestry designed by Lebrun showing Louis XIV Visiting the Gobelins (Gobelins Museum, Paris, 1663-75) gives a good idea of the range of its activities. In 1694 the factory was closed because of the king's financial difficulties, and although it reopened in 1699, thereafter it made only tapestries. For much of the 18th century it retained its position as the foremost tapestry manufactory in Europe. 0udry and Boucher successively held the post of Director (1733-70). The Gobelins continues in production today and houses a tapestry museum.
a noble chivalric order, still in existence today, founded by Duke Philip the Good of Burgundy in 1430 in honor of the Apostle Andrew, for the defence of the Christian faith and the Church. In allusion to the legend of Jason and the Argonauts, the symbol of the order is a golden ram's fleece drawn through a gold ring.
In painting and architecture, a formula meant to provide the aesthetically most satisfying proportions for a picture or a feature of a building. The golden section is arrived at by dividing a line unevenly so that the shorter length is to the larger as the larger is to the whole. This ratio is approximately 8:13. The golden section (sometimes known as the golden mean), which was thought to express a perfect harmony of proportions, played an important role in Renaissance theories of art.
Italian gonfaloniere ("standard bearer"), a title of high civic magistrates in the medieval Italian city-states.
In Florence the gonfaloniers of the companies (gonfalonieri di compagnia) originated during the 1250s as commanders of the people's militia. In the 1280s a new office called the gonfalonier of justice (gonfaloniere di giustizia) was instituted to protect the interests of the people against the dominant magnate class. The holder of this office subsequently became the most prominent member of the Signoria (supreme executive council of Florence) and formal head of the civil administration. In other Italian cities, the role of the gonfaloniers was similar to that in Florence. Gonfaloniers headed the militia from the various city quarters, while the gonfalonier of justice often was the chief of the council of guild representatives.
The kings of France traditionally bore the title gonfalonier of St. Denis. The honorary title of gonfalonier of the church (vexillifer ecclesiae) was conferred by the popes, from the 13th until the 17th century, on sovereigns and other distinguished persons.
Gothic, which may well have originated with Alberti as a derogatory term and which certainly corresponds to Vasari's 'maniera tedesca' ('German style'), is properly the descriptive term for an artistic style which achieved its first full flowering in the Ile de France and the surrounding areas in the period between c. 1200 and c. 1270, and which then spread throughout northern Europe. It is characterized by the hitherto unprecedented integration of the arts of sculpture, painting, stained glass and architecture which is epitomized in the great cathedrals of Chartres, Amiens, and Reims or in the Sainte Chapelle in Paris. In all the arts the predominantly planar forms of the Romanesque are replaced by an emphasis on line. There is a transcendental quality, whether in the soaring forms of the pointed arches or in the new stress on the humanity of Christ, which similarly distinguishes it from the preceding Romanesque style.
In thinking of Nicola (d. c. 1284) or Giovanni Pisano (d. after 1314) there is same danger of forgetting what had happened in French sculpture half a century or more earlier, and likewise it is hard to remember that the spectacular achievements of early Renaissance art are a singularly localized eddy in the continuing stream of late gothic European art. By northern European standards few Italian works of art can be called gothic without qualification, and the story of 13th and 14th century Italian architecture is as much one of resistance to the new style as of its reception, whether directly from France or through German or central European intermediaries. In sculpture and in painting, the Italian reluctance to distort the human figure, conditioned by a never wholly submerged awareness of the omnipresent antique heritage, gives a special quality to the work of even those artists such as Giovanni Pisano or Simone Martini who most closely approached a pure gothic style.
Nevertheless, the vitalizing role of Northern gothic art throughout the early Renaissance and the period leading up to it should never be underestimated. The artistic, like the cultural and commercial, interaction was continuous and much of the Italian achievement is incomprehensible if seen in isolation. It is not merely at the level of direct exchanges between one artist and another, or the influence of one building; painting, manuscript or piece of sculpture upon another, that the effects are to be felt. The streaming quality of line which is so characteristic of Brunelleschi's early Renaissance architecture surely reflects a sensitivity to the gothic contribution which is entirely independent of, and lies much deeper than, the superficial particularities of form.
The counterflow of influence and inspiration from South to North must likewise not be underrated. In particular, the contribution of Italian painters from Duccio and Simone Martini onwards is central to the evolution of the so-called International Gothic style developing in Burgundy, Bohemia and north Italy in the late 14th and early 15th centuries.
Gouache is opaque watercolour, known also as poster paint and designer's colour. It is thinned with water for applying, with sable- and hog-hair brushes, to white or tinted paper and card and, occasionally, to silk. Honey, starch, or acrylic is sometimes added to retard its quick-drying property. Liquid glue is preferred as a thinner by painters wishing to retain the tonality of colours (which otherwise dry slightly lighter in key) and to prevent thick paint from flaking. Gouache paints have the advantages that they dry out almost immediately to a mat finish and, if required, without visible brush marks. These qualities, with the capacities to be washed thinly or applied in thick impasto and a wide colour range that now includes fluorescent and metallic pigments, make the medium particularly suited to preparatory studies for oil and acrylic paintings. It is the medium that produces the suede finish and crisp lines characteristic of many Indian and Islamic miniatures, and it has been used in Western screen and fan decoration and by modern artists such as Rouault, Klee, Dubuffet, and Morris Graves.
Term applied to the lofty and rhetorical manner of history painting that in academic theory was considered appropriate to the most serious and elevated subjects. The classic exposition of its doctrines is found in Reynolds's Third and Fourth Discourses (1770 and 1771), where he asserts that 'the gusto grande of the Italians, the beau idéal of the French, and the great style, genius, and taste among the English, are but different appellations of the same thing'. The idea of the Grand Manner took shape in 17th-century Italy, notably in the writings of Bellori. His friend Poussin and the great Bolognese painters of the 17th century were regarded as outstanding exponents of the Grand Manner, but the greatest of all was held to be Raphael.
An extensive journey to the Continent, chiefly to France, the Netherlands, and above all Italy, sometimes in the company of a tutor, that became a conventional feature in the education of the English gentleman in the 18th century. Such tours often took a year or more. It had a noticeable effect in bringing a more cosmopolitan spirit to the taste of connoisseurs and laid the basis for many collections among the landed gentry. It also helped the spread of the fashion for Neoclassicism and an enthusiasm for Italian painting. Among the native artists who catered for this demand were Batoni, Canaletto, Pannini, and Piranesi, and British artists (such as Nollekens) were sometimes able to support themselves while in Italy by working for the dealers and restorers who supplied the tourist clientele. There was also a flourishing market in guide books.
A cross with four arms of equal length.
Term current with several different meanings in the literature of the visual arts. In the context of the fine arts, it most usually refers to those arts that rely essentially on line or tone rather than colour — i.e. drawing and the various forms of engraving. Some writers, however, exclude drawing from this definition, so that the term 'graphic art' is used to cover the various processes by which prints are created. In another sense, the term — sometimes shortened to 'graphics' — is used to cover the entire field of commercial printing, including text as well as illustrations.
A painting done entirely in one colour, usually gray. Grisaille paintings were often intended to imitate sculpture.
Italian political terms derived from the German Welf, a personal and thence family name of the dukes of Bavaria, and Waiblingen, the name of a castle of the Hohenstaufen dukes of Swabia apparently used as a battle cry. Presumably introduced into Italy 1198-1218, when partisans of the Emperor Otto IV (Welf) contested central Italy with supporters of Philip of Swabia and his' nephew Frederick II, the terms do not appear in the chronicles until the Emperor Frederick's conflict with the Papacy 1235-50, when Guelf meant a supporter of the Pope and Ghibelline a supporter of the Empire. From 1266 to 1268, when Naples was conquered by Charles of Anjou, brother of Louis IX, the French connection became the touchstone of Guelfism, and the chain of Guelf alliances stretching from Naples, through central Italy, to Provence and Paris, underwritten by the financial interests of the Tuscan bankers, became an abiding feature of European politics. The Italian expeditions of Henry of Luxemburg (1310-13) and Lewis of Bavaria (1327-29) spread the terms to northern Italy, with the Visconti of Milan and the della Scala of Verona emerging as the leading Ghibelline powers. Attempts by Guelf propagandists to claim their party as the upholder of liberty and their opponents as the protagonists of tyranny rarely coincide with the truth: power politics, then as now, generally overrode ideology in inter-state affairs.
Factional struggles had existed within the Italian states from time immemorial, the parties taking a multitude of local names. In Florence, however, Guelf and Ghibelline were applied to the local factions which supposedly originated in a feud between the Buondelmonte and Amidei clans, c. 1216. In 1266-67 the Guelf party, which had recruited most of the merchant class, finally prevailed over the predominantly noble Ghibellines; after this, internal factions in Florence went under other names, like the Blacks and the Whites who contested for control of the commune between 1295 and 1302. Meanwhile the Parte Guelfa had become a corporate body whose wealth and moral authority as the guardian of political orthodoxy enabled it to play the part of a powerful pressure group through most of the 14th century. After the War of the Eight Saints, the influence of the Parte declined rapidly. Although its palace was rebuilt c. 1418-58 to the designs of Brunelleschi, it had no part in the conflicts surrounding the rise of the Medici régime.
An association of the masters of a particular craft, trade or profession (painters, goldsmiths, surgeons, and so on) set up to protect its members' rights and interests. Such guilds existed in virtually every European city in the 16th century. The guild also monitored standards of work, acted as a court for those who brought their trade into disrepute, and provided assistance to members in need.
Guilds were essentially associations of masters in particular crafts, trades, or professions. In Italy they go back a long way; there is documentary evidence of guilds in 6th century Naples. In origin they were clubs which observed religious festivals together and attended the funerals of their members, but in time they acquired other functions. Their economic function was to control standards and to enforce the guild's monopoly of particular activities in a particular territory. Their political function was to participate in the government of the city-state. In some cities, notably Florence in the 14th century, only guildsmen were eligible for civic office, thus excluding both noblemen (unless they swallowed their pride and joined, as some did), and unskilled workers like the woolcombers and dyers. In Florence in 1378 these groups demanded the right to form their own guilds, and there were similar movements of protest in Siena and Bologna.
Guilds were also patrons of art, commissioning paintings for guildhalls, contributing to the fabric fund of cathedrals and collaborating on collective projects like the statues for Orsanmichele at Florence. The guilds were not equal. In Florence, the 7 'Greater Guilds', including such prestigious occupations as judges and bankers, outranked the 14 'Lesser Guilds', and in general the guild hierarchy was reflected in the order of precedence in processions. The great age of the guilds was the 13th and 14th centuries. The economic recession after 1348 meant fewer opportunities for journeymen to become masters, and greater hostility between master and man. The shift from trade to land in the 15th and 16th centuries meant a decline in the social standing of the crafts. In some towns, such as Brescia and Vicenza, guild membership actually became a disqualification instead of a qualification for municipal office. The guilds lost their independence and became instruments of state control. In 16th century Venice, for example, they were made responsible for supplying oarsmen for the galleys of the state.
Dutch painters who worked in The Hague between 1860 and 1900, producing renderings of local landscapes and the daily activities of local fisherman and farmers in the style of Realism. In this they extended the traditional focus on genre of the 17th-century Dutch masters with the fresh observation of their contemporary French counterparts, the Barbizon school. The group included Jozef Israëls; Hendrik Willem Mesdag; Jan Hendrik Weissenbruch; Jacob Maris, Matthijs Maris, and Willem Maris; Johannes Bosboom; and Anton Mauve.
In a drawing, print or painting, a series of close parallel lines that create the effect of shadow, and therefore contour and three-dimensionality In crosshatching the lines overlap.
the study of the meaning of emblems and coats of arms, with the rules governing their use.
The heretical movements affecting Italy between the mid-12th and the mid-14th century had their main impact in an area covering the north-west of the peninsula and southern France: it is not possible to speak of distinct Italian and meridional French movements. The authentically Christian movements which were expelled from the Catholic Church must in the first instance be distinguished from Catharism, which represented an infiltration by the originally non-Christian dualist system of Manichaeanism; from the start, the Cathars were an anti-church. By contrast, the Waldensian, Spiritual and Joachimite movements appeared initially as vital manifestations of Catholicism; only after their condemnation by the ecclesiastical authorities do they seem to have developed notably eccentric doctrines and to have described themselves as the true Church in opposition to the institutional Church; they had a recognizable kinship with movements that remained within the pale of orthodoxy.
These Christian heresies had in common an attachment to the ideal of apostolic poverty, which came to be seen by the ecclesiastical authorities as a challenge to the institutionalized Church. The Waldensians or Valdesi (not to be confused with Valdesiani, the followers of Juan de Valdes, d. 1541) took their origin from the Poor Men of Lyons, founded by Peter Valdes or Waldo in the 1170s. They were distinguished by a strong attachment to the Bible and a desire to imitate Christ's poverty. At first approved by the Papacy as an order of laymen, they were condemned in 1184. Likewise condemned was the rather similar Lombard movement of the Humiliati. One stream of these remained as an approved order within the Catholic Church, while others merged with the Waldensians. The Waldensians came to teach that the sacraments could be administered validly only by the pure, i.e: only by Waldensian superiors or perfecti practising evangelical poverty. Alone among the heretical sects existing in Italy they were organized as a church, and regarded themselves as forming, together with brethren north of the Alps, one great missionary community. They spread all over western and central Europe but in the long term they came to be largely confined to the Rhaetian and Cottian Alps (the Grisons and Savoy). The Italian Waldensians in the 16th century resisted absorption by Reformed Protestantism.
The early Franciscans might be regarded as a movement, similar in character to the Poor Men of Lyons, which was won for the cause of Catholic orthodoxy. However, divisions within the order over the issue of poverty led to religious dissidence. The Spirituals held up the ideal of strict poverty as obligatory for Franciscans and, indeed, normative for churchmen; following the Papacy's recognition of the Franciscan order as a property-owning body in 1322-23, their position became one of criticism of the institutional Church as such. Their heresies came to incorporate the millenarian doctrines of the 12th century abbot Joachim of Fiore. He had prophesied a coming age of the Holy Spirit ushered in by Spiritual monks; his heretical followers prophesied a new Spiritual gospel that would supersede the Bible. Joachimite Spiritualists came to see the pope, head of the 'carnal Church', as Antichrist. The main impact of the movement upon the laity was in southern France; in Italy it was an affair of various groups of fraticelli de paupere vita (little friars of the poor life), mainly in the south.
A courtesan of ancient Greece. There may have been one or two hetaira called Lais in ancient Corinth. One was the model of the celebrated painter Apelles.
prepared throne, Preparation of the Throne, ready throne or Throne of the Second Coming is the Christian version of the symbolic subject of the empty throne found in the art of the ancient world. In the Middle Byzantine period, from about 1000, it came to represent more specifically the throne prepared for the Second Coming of Christ, a meaning it has retained in Eastern Orthodox art to the present.
Painting concerned with the representation of scenes from the Bible, history (usually classical history), and classical literature. From the Renaissance to the 19th century it was considered the highest form of painting, its subjects considered morally elevating.
a representation of the Virgin and Child in a fenced garden, sometimes accompanied by a group of female saints. The garden is a symbolic allusion to a phrase in the Song of Songs (4:12): 'A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse'.
group of American landscape painters, working from 1825 to 1875. The 19th-century romantic movements of England, Germany, and France were introduced to the United States by such writers as Washington Irving and James Fenimore Cooper. At the same time, American painters were studying in Rome, absorbing much of the romantic aesthetic of the European painters. Adapting the European ideas about nature to a growing pride in the beauty of their homeland, for the first time a number of American artists began to devote themselves to landscape painting instead of portraiture. First of the group of artists properly classified with the Hudson River school was Thomas Doughty; his tranquil works greatly influenced later artists of the school. Thomas Cole, whose dramatic and colourful landscapes are among the most impressive of the school, may be said to have been its leader during the group's most active years. Among the other important painters of the school are Asher B. Durand, J. F. Kensett, S. F. B. Morse, Henry Inman, Jasper Cropsey, Frederick E. Church, and, in his earlier work, George Inness.
philosophical movement which started in Italy in the mid-14th century, and which drew on antiquity to make man the focal point. In humanism, the formative spiritual attitude of the Renaissance, the emancipation of man from God took place. It went hand in hand with a search for new insights into the spiritual and scientific workings of this world. The humanists paid particular attention to the rediscovery and nurture of the Greek and Latin languages and literature. To this day the term denotes the supposedly ideal combination of education based on classical erudition and humanity based on observation of reality.

A Companion to Latin American History
January 2008, Wiley-Blackwell
This price is valid for United States. Change location to view local pricing and availability.
This is a Print-on-Demand title. It will be printed specifically to fill your order. Please allow an additional 5-6 days delivery time. The book is not returnable.
The Companion to Latin American History collects the work of leading experts in the field to create a single-source overview of the diverse history and current trends in the study of Latin America.
- Presents a state-of-the-art overview of the history of Latin America
- Written by the top international experts in the field
- 28 chapters come together as a superlative single source of information for scholars and students
- Recognizes the breadth and diversity of Latin American history by providing systematic chronological and geographical coverage
- Covers both historical trends and new areas of interest

Henry Evans is a mute quadriplegic, having suffered a stroke when he was just 40 years old. Following extensive therapy, Henry regained the ability to move his head and use a finger, which allows him to operate computers. Last year, Henry caught a TV interview of Georgia Tech Professor Charlie Kemp showing research with the Willow Garage PR2 robot. Willow Garage and Professor Kemp were contacted by Henry shortly afterwards, and we have been collaborating since then.
We are currently exploring ways for Henry to use a PR2 robot as his surrogate. Every day, people take for granted the simple act of scratching an itch. In Henry's case, 2-3 times every hour of every day he gets an itch he can't scratch. With the aid of a PR2, Henry was able to scratch an itch for himself for the first time in 10 years.
While this is only a first step, it demonstrates how people with severe physical disabilities could use personal robots to gain independence. In another example, Henry recently used the PR2 to shave his cheek. We are actively researching ways for Henry and others to perform tasks like these on a daily basis.
Currently, Henry uses a head tracker to operate a variety of experimental user interfaces. These interfaces allow him to directly move the robot's body, including its arms and head. They also let him invoke autonomous actions, such as navigating in a room and reaching out to a location.
Robots that complement human abilities are extremely valuable, especially when they help us do things that we can't do by ourselves. Our goal is to get robots in homes to help people like Henry and Jane Evans. This is just the beginning.
Leila Takayama Recognized by MIT Technology Review's TR35 Listing of the World's Top Young Innovators for 2012

A California-based company is attempting to introduce
expert crowdsourcing to oncology to try and ensure that each
cancer patient gets the most appropriate treatment.
Commons brings together leading physicians and scientists in
each type of cancer to create an open-source wiki-style database
that will catalogue the different genomic subtypes of each disease
and show how patients are responding to different treatments.
The project is based on the hypothesis that every
patient's tumour is, to some extent, unique. Although most
cancer drugs are tested individually in large-scale clinical
trials, the majority of physicians (70 percent) prescribe cocktails
of drugs based on their individual experience and particular
genomic subtype of the cancer. By capturing, aggregating and
analysing the genomic and results data of these individual drug
experiments -- cross referencing them with the large scale clinical
trials and studies -- physicians might be able to more efficiently
find the most appropriate treatment for their patients.
Cancer Commons was set up by Jay "Marty"
Tenenbaum -- a Silicon Valley entrepreneur and
cancer survivor who founded a range of e-commerce companies
including CommerceNet and Veo Systems. He also
founded Enterprise Integration Technologies, the first company
to conduct a commercial internet transaction, in 1992. More
recently he has focused on transforming healthcare, launching CollabRx, which uses computers
to personalise cancer treatments and accelerate research (and which
powers Cancer Commons).
Tenenbaum argues that there are thousands of studies that are
published each year, with only a handful of them getting national
or international attention. Furthermore, there are hundreds of
thousands of individual "trials" being conducted by doctors (some
30,000 oncologists in the US, where the program is limited to for
the time being) who are experimenting with different cocktails of
drugs on their patients. Without one central place to store
and access these studies, scientific and clinical advancement in
this field is being artificially held back.
A major hurdle for the project is getting researchers to supply
their data to the site, rather than hold out for a career-making
article in a peer-reviewed journal. Tenenbaum is frustrated by how
little data is shared between peers and hopes that Cancer Commons
could mark the dawn of a new era of open-source science.
Tenenbaum told Wired.co.uk: "There is lots of talking in
fragmented silos, but we want to capture all of that in one place
and expedite the process through which science turns into
The first stage of Cancer Commons is to create a database where
each different type of cancer has a "Molecular Disease Model" (MDM)
-- an expert-curated reference node that catalogues the known
molecular subtypes of a particular cancer, linked to relevant
pathways, diagnostic tests, approved and experimental therapies and
current clinical trials. Each is akin to a dynamic research paper
that reflects the latest scientific, clinical and technological
advancements. A rapid submission and dissemination process allows
each MDM to be maintained online and continuously updated by cancer
specialists and moderated by editors.
The project is governed by an editorial board with an impressive
set of credentials. The 18 specialists -- chaired by George
Lundberg, former editor-in-chief of Journal of the American Medical
Association and of WebMD's online properties
and e-Medicine --
include a former FDA Commissioner, a former editor of
Science and a former president of the American Society of
So far, only one model has been created, for melanoma. It
incorporates 78,185 abstracts from research papers and information
relating to some 1016 clinical trials that are ongoing in the
field. Some 11 expert editors have been assigned to that particular
MDM, including Dr David Fisher, the head of the dermatology at
Harvard Medical School and Dr Keith Flaherty, from the department
of medicine at Harvard Medical School. Over the coming year the
plan is to create MDMs for other cancers including lung, breast,
sarcoma, and lymphoma -- each with their own experts overseeing
In order to harness the power of the MDM, CollabRx is developing
apps that tap into the data to aid decision-making. For example,
the "Targeted Therapy Finder" can be used by doctors to help
identify genetic tests that map an individual tumour's unique
characteristics, and then select potential treatments based on the
findings. By entering information about the particular tumour,
they'll be given options of tests that'll help narrow down the
particular subtype of cancer being dealt with (as categorised by
the MDM), and therefore find out which treatments are the most
promising. They can then find information about trials that are
looking for patients with that particular subtype.
The view is to develop further apps that allow doctors and
researchers to submit clinical observations and outcomes and then
collaboratively analyse them to fine-tune the MDMs. Tenenbaum would
also like to see patients report how they're responding to
treatments. He tells Wired.co.uk: "Over time I'd like the
results of lab tests to go directly into the database."
He doesn't underestimate the enormity of the task, admitting
that not all of the details are worked out yet and that the initial
MDMs will "almost certainly be incomplete and wrong in places". He
adds: "We don't pretend that we are going to cure cancer. But we
ought to be able to improve the outcomes for some patients."
Tenenbaum wants to make applications that are so compelling to
doctors that they'll have to use them to stay relevant in their
fields. "I see possibilities to slash time and development of new
drugs and improve patient care."

Robb Godshaw, from Syynlabs,
has created a haptic cube that gives you an impression of what the
temperature will be like tomorrow.
The cube, which Godshaw has named the Cryoscope, consists of an
aluminium shell surrounding a Peltier
element, heatsink, cooling fan and an LED, all controlled by an
Arduino. The cube is heated to a "neutral" state of 30C, and then
adjusted by the number of degrees that the next day's forecast
differs from room temperature (23C).
It takes into account wind chill and humidity to give an idea
what the following day will "feel" like, rather than merely
reflecting air temperature. So, for example, if the forecast for
the next day is for 18C, once those factors are all taken into
account, the cube's
temperature will decrease five degrees from 30C to 25C,
resulting in it being slightly cool to the touch.
Godshaw describes it in the video above as a "haptic
weathervane", adding: "Users enter their location into a web app.
The cube then automatically adjusts to the forecasted temperature.
By touching the Cryoscope, the user is able to feel tomorrow's air
You can see
the Cryoscope in action over on Godshaw's website.
Updated 08:29 09/05/2012: Godshaw has
redesigned the Cryoscope and is raising money for full production
over on Kickstarter.

Odd Wisconsin Archive
Today marks the 25th anniversary of the first AIDS diagnosis, a gruesome fact but one which, like every other, has a historical context. Epidemics have swept through human communities for about 10,000 years, and Wisconsin has had its share.
European diseases probably reached Wisconsin before European explorers themselves. In the fifty years following Hernando de Soto's invasion of the lower Mississippi in 1539, disease killed 90 percent of the Indians living in the middle Mississippi Valley. These were Indians with whom Wisconsin peoples had traded for centuries, since at least the time of Aztalan. Many archaeologists have speculated that epidemics of measles or smallpox may have swept through Indian communities in Wisconsin decades before Jean Nicolet stepped ashore in 1634.
Once Europeans set up permanent settlements and native peoples gathered around them, disease penetrated Indian communities as effectively as metal pots, firearms, or porcelain beads. “Maladies wrought among them more devastation than even war did,” concluded contemporary French writer Bacqueville de la Potherie of the Wisconsin tribes, “and exhalations from the rotting corpses caused great mortality.”
The first clearly documented epidemic in Wisconsin was an act of bioterrorism perpetrated by British traders against Indians who had killed one of their colleagues. Dr. Douglass Houghton, who interviewed the Ojibwe about epidemics in 1832, wrote down their recollection that in 1770, when visiting Mackinac, "a cask of liquor and a flag closely rolled were presented to the Indians as a token of friendship. They were at the same time strictly enjoined neither to break the seal of the cask nor to unroll the flag, until they had reached the heart of their own country.
"This they promised to observe; but while returning, and after having travelled many days, the chief of the deputation made a feast for the Indians of the band at Fond du Lac, Lake Superior, upon which occasion he unsealed the cask and unrolled the flag for the gratification of his guests... and of those Indians then at Fond du Lac, about three hundred in number, nearly the whole were swept off by it. Nor did it stop here; for numbers of those at Fond du Lac at the time the disease made its appearance, took refuge among the neighboring bands; and although it did not extend easterly on Lake Superior, it is believed that not a single band of Chippewas north or west from Fond du Lac escaped its ravages...
"The Indians at this day  are firmly of the opinion that the smallpox was at this time communicated through the articles presented to their brethren by the agent of the Fur Company at Mackinac; and that it was done for the purpose of punishing them more severely for their offences." His full account, including other outbreaks after this first one, is here. Houghton estimated that the disease had appeared among the Ojibwe at least five times in the previous 60 years.
Disease is no respecter of race or ethnicity, and the earliest white settlers suffered catastrophically from epidemic outbreaks as well. At Fort Crawford in the summer of 1830, 154 of the 199 soldiers came down with malaria. Cholera broke out among them in August 1833, taking down 23 soldiers and killing six, and other outbreaks swept through the state between 1849 and 1854.
In August of 1895, smallpox swept through the southside of Milwaukee, where the traditions of recent Polish immigrants clashed with modern public health practices. The first patients were segregated at an isolation hospital outside the neighborhood, even though the residents preferred caring for their own sick in their own homes, as they had in the old country. When hospital patients began dying, the residents came to see the hospital as a slaughterhouse -- a place they would never send their loved ones. When city health officials or ambulances attempted to remove patients to protect the uninfected, they were met by barricaded doors and armed uprisings. A protest rally drew nearly 10,000 people to the hospital who stoned the police and fired pistols in the air. The 100 police officers plunged into the crowd swinging billy clubs, cracking heads and driving people back to their homes.
The Spanish Flu epidemic that followed World War I perhaps affected more Wisconsin residents than any other outbreak. Known variously as the "Spanish Flu" or "La Grippe," influenza killed an estimated 50 million people worldwide. By the end of 1918, more than 675,000 Americans had died from the flu, most between the ages of 19 and 42, and the Wisconsin Board of Health declared that the "Spanish flu" epidemic would "forever be remembered as the most disastrous calamity that has ever been visited upon the people of Wisconsin." The first cases were reported in southern Wisconsin in September 1918, and by December, influenza had sickened almost 103,000 residents and killed more than 8,000. Read more here, in the autumn 2000 issue of our Wisconsin Magazine of History.
Read more about Wisconsin diseases and epidemics on our Topics in Wisconsin History page.
:: Posted in Curiosities on June 4, 2006

World Bulletin / News Desk
Wheat experts are stepping up monitoring of a crop disease first found in Africa in 1999 to minimise the spread of a deadly fungus that is also a threat in Asia, experts said on Friday.
A "Rust-Tracker", using data supplied by farmers and scientists, could now monitor the fungus in 27 developing nations across 42 million hectares (103 million acres) of wheat - an area the size of Iraq or California.
"It's the most serious wheat disease," Ronnie Coffman, vice-chair of the Borlaug Global Rust Initiative (BGRI), told Reuters ahead of a meeting of wheat experts in Beijing from Sept. 1-4.
"If it gets started...it's like a biological firestorm," he said. Experts will review progress in combating the disease, with fungicides and 20 new resistant varieties developed in recent years.
The stem rust disease, forming reddish patches on plants like rust on metal, is known as Ug99 after it was found in Uganda in 1999. It has since spread as far as South Africa and north to Yemen and Iran.
The fungus, which can destroy entire wheat fields, is likely eventually to be carried worldwide on the winds. The biggest threat in coming years is a spread across Asia to Pakistan, India and China, the world's top producer, Coffman said.
"Effective control often depends on finding out what is happening in distant regions, and the Rust-Tracker can help scientists assess the status of stem rust and other rust diseases," said Dave Hodson, the developer of Rust-Tracker.
About 85 percent of wheat now in production worldwide was reckoned to be vulnerable to Ug99 and its variants, the BGRI estimated. Rich nations are far less vulnerable because they can afford to switch to new varieties or deploy fungicides.
Among developing nations, Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Egypt, India, Kenya, Nepal and Pakistan are on the front line of deploying rust-resistant varieties.
Coffman said that relatively minor amounts of wheat output had been lost so far. "The only country under immediate threat of a dramatic loss of production is Ethiopia," he said.
In Kenya, for instance, Ug99 had been brought largely under control because of shifts to new varieties. Another threat was from yellow rust, which has struck nations from Morocco to Uzbekistan in recent years.
The Ug99 fungus is among threats to food supplies. A U.N. panel of scientists says that heat waves, floods and droughts -- like the one affecting the United States this year -- are likely to become more frequent because of manmade climate change.
Scientists were also studying ways to limit a woody plant known as barberry, where the fungus also lives. Efforts to eradicate the plant in the 20th century seem to have reduced rust.
And the rust had overcome a genetic resistance to the disease developed for wheat in the early 1970s by Norman Borlaug, the father of the "Green Revolution" that introduced higher-yielding crop varieties, Coffman said.
He said that rust had been known at least since Roman times. About 40 percent of the U.S. crop was destroyed in the early 1950s when rust swept up from Mexico.

Divers have found 30 bottles of champagne thought to pre-date the French Revolution on the Baltic seabed.
When they opened one, they found the wine - believed to have been made by Clicquot (now Veuve Clicquot) between 1782 and 1788 - was still in good condition.
The bottle - whose shape indicates it was produced in the 18th Century - has now been sent to France for analysis.
If confirmed, it would be the oldest drinkable champagne in the world.
Diver Christian Ekstrom was exploring a shipwreck on the Baltic seabed when he found the bottles.
He took one to the surface, where he opened it and tasted it with his colleagues.
"It was fantastic," he told the Reuters news agency.
"It had a very sweet taste, you could taste oak and it had a very strong tobacco smell. And there were very small bubbles."
According to records, Clicquot champagne was first produced in 1772 but was laid down for 10 years.
Production was disrupted after the French Revolution in 1789.
The wine found on the seabed was perfectly preserved because of the conditions of dark and cold on the seabed.
If the bottles do come from the 1780s, that would make them around 40 years older than the current record-holder, a bottle of Perrier-Jouet from 1825.
Wine experts estimate each bottle would fetch around 500,000 Swedish kronor (£45,000; $69,000) at auction.
The bottles were found off the coast of Aaland, an autonomous part of Finland. The local authorities will decide what is done with the shipwreck - and the champagne.

French and American scientists won the Nobel Prize in physics Tuesday for their work with light and matter, which may lead the way to superfast computers and "the most precise clocks ever seen," the prize committee said.
Serge Haroche of France and David Wineland of the United States will share the $1.2 million prize, the second of six Nobel Prizes announced this month.
The award surprised those who expected the physics Nobel this year to be related to the discovery of the Higgs boson, considered one of the top scientific achievements of the past 50 years.
Wineland and Haroche work in the field of quantum optics, approaching the same principles from opposite directions. The American uses light particles to measure the properties of matter, whereas his French colleague focuses on tracking light particles by using atoms.
Both Nobel laureates have found ways to isolate the subatomic particles and keep their properties intact at the same time, scientists at the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences said in Stockholm, Sweden.
Usually when these particles interact with the outside world, the properties that scientists would like to directly observe disappear, leaving researchers postulating over what is going on with them.
The two have found a way around this, making direct observation possible. "The new methods allow them to examine, control and count the particles," the academy said.
Haroche is a professor at the College de France and Ecole Normale Superieure in Paris, and Wineland is group leader and NIST Fellow at the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the University of Colorado Boulder.
Their work has some potential side benefits to future technology.
"Their ground-breaking methods have enabled this field of research to take the very first steps towards building a new type of super fast computer based on quantum physics," the academy said.

On behalf of Gov. Mark Schweiker, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) Secretary David E. Hess announced that this month's episode of the Emmy-award-winning television series GreenWorks for Pennsylvania features stories about people working to protect Pennsylvania's watersheds.
"Raising awareness of the role watersheds play in our environment is one of the cornerstones of Pennsylvania's `Growing Greener' program," Hess said. "The current episode of GreenWorks features people of all ages learning about, protecting and restoring Pennsylvania's watersheds.
GreenWorks, produced in a video-magazine format, takes viewers across the Commonwealth to spotlight people doing positive things for the environment. GreenWorks is supported by DEP and the Environmental Fund for Pennsylvania (EFP). The current episode runs through October. This month's episode includes these features.
* The Radnor Middle School Watershed Program in Delaware County, which takes students out of the classroom and into the field to learn about watersheds first hand.
* Members of the Delaware RiverKeepers, who worked on mitigating stream bank erosion by clearing, regrading and covering a stream bank with a biodegradable mesh of coconut fibers allowing native plants to regain a healthy foothold.
* The Pottstown Watershed Alliance, which removed an old dam in the Manatawny Creek in Pottstown, Montgomery County, to improve water quality.
* Members of the Swatara Creek Watershed Association and DEP staff, which cleaned up 33 acres of abandoned mine drainage in Schuylkill County.
* The River Sojourn 2001, where people from all walks of life canoed and kayaked on Pennsylvania rivers to connect with and appreciate the beauty and power of the state's natural water resources.
"We all depend on rivers and watersheds for drinking water and more," EFP Executive Director Timothy J. Schlitzer said. "I hope this program will deepen viewers' understanding and respect for what it takes to protect our precious waterways."
EFP funds environmental education and improvement projects from contributions made through employee payroll-deduction programs established by businesses and the Commonwealth and other donations.
The series reaches more than five million households in Pennsylvania through 83 cable television stations as well as the Public Broadcasting Service.
For a listing of stations carrying GreenWorks and information on particular broadcasts, visit the GreenWorks website through the PA PowerPort at www.state.pa.us, directly at www.GreenWorks.tv, or call EFP at 1-800-PAGREEN ext. 1.

Here's the way the NWS defines it:
Forecasts issued by the National Weather Service routinely include a "PoP" (probability of precipitation) statement, which is often expressed as the "chance of rain" or "chance of precipitation".http://www.srh.noaa.gov/ffc/?n=pop
ZONE FORECASTS FOR NORTH AND CENTRAL GEORGIA
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE PEACHTREE CITY GA
119 PM EDT THU MAY 8 2008
INCLUDING THE CITIES OF...ATLANTA...CONYERS...DECATUR...
119 PM EDT THU MAY x 2008
.THIS AFTERNOON...MOSTLY CLOUDY WITH A 40 PERCENT CHANCE OF
SHOWERS AND THUNDERSTORMS. WINDY. HIGHS IN THE LOWER 80S. NEAR
STEADY TEMPERATURE IN THE LOWER 80S. SOUTH WINDS 15 TO 25 MPH.
.TONIGHT...MOSTLY CLOUDY WITH A CHANCE OF SHOWERS AND
THUNDERSTORMS IN THE EVENING...THEN A SLIGHT CHANCE OF SHOWERS
AND THUNDERSTORMS AFTER MIDNIGHT. LOWS IN THE MID 60S. SOUTHWEST
WINDS 5 TO 15 MPH. CHANCE OF RAIN 40 PERCENT.
What does this "40 percent" mean? ...will it rain 40 percent of of the time? ...will it rain over 40 percent of the area?
The "Probability of Precipitation" (PoP) describes the chance of precipitation occurring at any point you select in the area.
How do forecasters arrive at this value?
Mathematically, PoP is defined as follows:
PoP = C x A where "C" = the confidence that precipitation will occur somewhere in the forecast area, and where "A" = the percent of the area that will receive measureable precipitation, if it occurs at all.
So... in the case of the forecast above, if the forecaster knows precipitation is sure to occur ( confidence is 100% ), he/she is expressing how much of the area will receive measurable rain. ( PoP = "C" x "A" or "1" times ".4" which equals .4 or 40%.)
But, most of the time, the forecaster is expressing a combination of degree of confidence and areal coverage. If the forecaster is only 50% sure that precipitation will occur, and expects that, if it does occur, it will produce measurable rain over about 80 percent of the area, the PoP (chance of rain) is 40%. ( PoP = .5 x .8 which equals .4 or 40%. )
In either event, the correct way to interpret the forecast is: there is a 40 percent chance that rain will occur at any given point in the area.

"Caring, Effective, Middle/High School Math Tutor"
...Sometimes it is just more practice that is needed, but in any case it is very important that students know math facts, operations, decimals, fractions, ratios, percents, and proportions extremely well. They must also have general "number sense." I bring a lot of experience helping students learn these basics, which are the key building blocks of...
10 subjects, including algebra 1

Why is my paper pink?
The color of today’s paper is probably quite a shock to many of our readers, and that is just the effect we are hoping for.
Today marks the beginning of Breast Cancer Awareness Month, and this edition of The Yazoo Herald is dedicated to raising awareness about the importance of early detection and encouraging support for efforts to help find a cure.
Most of us know someone who has been affected by breast cancer. Besides some forms of skin cancer, it is the most common cancer in women.
It doesn’t discriminate. Breast cancer rates are equally high among women of all races. The Center of Disease Control reports that it is the highest cause of death by cancer among Hispanic women and the second-leading cancer cause of death among white and black women. One in eight women in the United States will suffer from invasive breast cancer at some point in their lives.
Fortunately, breast cancer deaths have been decreasing since 1990 as detection and treatment improve, reducing the mortality rate to 3 in 100. If you’re reading this and you haven’t had an examination, it’s time to make an appointment.
Last Updated (Friday, 30 September 2011 18:19)

Origin: LL exarchus, overseer of monasteries < Gr exarchos, leader, chief (in LGr, prefect, bishop): see ex- & -arch
Origin: < ex- + Gr archē, beginning
See exarch in American Heritage Dictionary 4
Origin: Late Latin exarchus, an overseer
Origin: , from Greek exarkhos
Origin: , from exarkhein, to lead
Origin: : ex-, ex-
Origin: + arkhein, to rule.
Origin: + Greek arkhē, beginning (from arkhein, to rule, begin).
Learn more about exarch

|Yoon Jae Kim, yj1dreamer AT gmail.com (A project report written under the guidance of Prof. Raj Jain)||Download|
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) is a design pattern which is composed of loosely coupled, discoverable, reusable, inter-operable platform agnostic services in which each of these services follow a well defined standard. Each of these services can be bound or unbound at any time and as needed. [Jamil08]However, as defined, SOA has a loosely-coupled feature, which makes SOA open to the challenges of security. It means that SOA must meet several requirements. The main requirements are as follows[Candolin07]: service discovery, service authentication, user authentication, access control, confidentiality, integrity, availability, and privacy. To ensure security in a loosely-coupled SOA environment, the open standards communities that created Web services developed a number of security standards for Web services which is one of the most active and widely adopted implementation of SOA. Figure 1 depicts a notional reference model for Web services security standards. This reference model maps the different standards to the different functional layers of a typical Web service implementation.
As described above, in the Web Services Security Stack the Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) and the eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) are the standard for access control which means that when the service is requested by a user the service must enforce the specified security policy related to access control. We focus on access control in the Web Services security and represent what SAML and XACML are, how they work and where they are able to be applied together.
SAML, created by the Security Services Technical Committee of the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS), is a an XML-based framework for communicating user authentication, entitlement, and attribute information. As its name suggests, SAML allows business entities to make assertions regarding the identity, attributes, and entitlements of a subject (an entity that is often a human user) to other entities, such as a partner company or another enterprise application. [Madsen05] SAML is a flexible and extensible protocol designed to be used - and customized if necessary - by other standards.
Web Single Sign-On
In web SSO, a user authenticates to one web site and then, without additional authentication, is able to access some personalized or customized resources at another site. SAML enables web SSO through the communication of an authentication assertion from the first site to the second which, if confident of the origin of the assertion, can choose to log in the user as if they had authenticated directly. A principal authenticates at the identity provider and is subsequently appropriately recognized (and given corresponding access/service) at the service provider.[Google]
For example, Google made SAML Single Sign-On (SSO) Service for Google Apps. And Google Apps provides a SAML-based Single Sign-On (SSO) service that offers partner companies with full control over the authorization and authentication of hosted user accounts that can access web-based applications like Gmail or Google Calendar. As the service provider Google offers services as Gmail and Start Pages and partner companies control account information as identity provider.
Similar to the Web SSO scenario, the attribute-based authorization model has one web site communicating identity information about a subject to another web site in support of some transaction.
However, the identity information may be some characteristic of the subject (such as a person's role in a B2B scenario) rather than, or in addition to, information about when and how the person was authenticated. The attribute-based authorization model is important when the individual's particular identity is either not important, should not be shared for privacy reasons, or is insufficient on its own.
Securing Web Services
SAML assertions can be used within SOAP messages in order to convey security and identity information between actors in web service interactions. The SAML Token Profile produced by the OASIS Web Services Security (WSS) TC specifies how SAML assertions should be used for this purpose with the WS-Security framework. The Liberty Alliance's Identity Web Service Framework (ID-WSF) builds on these specifications to use SAML assertions for enabling secure and privacy-respecting access to web services.
WS-Trust, one component of the private WS-* framework initiative, proposes protocols for the exchange and validation of security tokens used as described within WS-Security. SAML assertions are one such supported security token format.
Figure 3 illustrates these actors and information flow. As can be seen in the figure, the PAP writes Polices and PolicySets and makes them available to the PDP. These Policies or PolicySets shows the complete policy for a particular target. The PEP is the component where the request is received when access requester wants to take some action on a resource and make the request. In this part, the attributes in the request may be in the format of the application environment (e.g., SAML, etc.). The PEP sends the request to the Context Handler. Context Handler maps the request and attributes to the XACML Request context and sends the request to the PDP. While evaluating the request, the PDP needs some attributes and sends the attribute queries to the Context Handler. The Context Handler collects these attributes by the help of the PIP from the resources, subjects, and the environment. After evaluation, the PDP sends the XACML Response to the Context Handler and the Context Handler translates the Response context to the native response format of the application environment and sends it to PEP. The PEP fulfills the obligations if they exist and applies the authorization decision that PDP concludes.[Periorellis07]
A Request element contains four components as Subject, Resource, Action, and Environment. One request element has only one collection of resource and action attributes, and at most one collection of environment attributes. But there may be multiple collections of subject attributes. Subject attribute contains subject's details such as name, e-mail, role and so on. Resource attribute details the resource for which access is requested and action attribute specifies the requested action to be performed on resource such as read or wire. Also, Environment attribute is optional and contains attributes of environment.
A Response element represents the authorization decision information made by PDP. It contains one or more Result attributes. Each result includes a Decision such as Permit, Deny, NotApplicable, or Indeterminate, some Status information which gives the errors occurred and their descriptions while evaluating the request and optionally one or more Obligations which specifies tasks in the PolicySet and Policy elements in the policy description which should be performed before granting or denying access.
A Rule element defines the target elements to which the rule is applied and details conditions to apply the rule and has three components such as target, effect, and condition. A target element specifies the resources, subjects, actions and the environment to which the rule is applied. A condition element shows the conditions to apply the rule and a effect is the consequence of the rule as either permit or deny.
A policy is the set of rules which are combined with some algorithms. These algorithms are called Rule-combining algorithms. For instance "Permit Override" algorithm allows the policy to evaluate to "Permit" if any rule in the policy evaluates to "Permit". A policy also contains target elements which shows the subjects, resources, actions, environment that policy is applied.
A PolicySet consists of Policies and PolicySets combined with policy-combined algorithm. It has also target like a Policy.
The XACML context shows how flexible and suitable the XACML is for various application. This feature makes it possible that XACML is applied to access control system with SAML. Section 4 shows the more detailed.
SAML is one standard suitable for providing the assertion and protocol mechanisms and specifies schemas for carrying the security and authorization related information and have the bindings to basic transportation mechanisms. Therefore, OASIS publishes a SAML profile for the XACML (OASIS, 2005)[Anderson05] to carry the XACML messages between the XACML actors. This profile defines the usage of SAML 2.0 to protect, store, transport, request and respond with XACML instances and other information. It contains largely four categories.
First, this profile specifies how to use SAML Attributes in an XACML system. This category contains three standard SAML elements such as SAML Attribute, SAML AttributeStatement and SAML Assertion, two standard SAML protocol such as SAML AttributeQuery and SAML Response, and one new SAML extension element, XACMLAssertion. In an XACML system, SAML Attribute may be used to store and to transmit attribute values and must be transformed into an XACML Attribute before used in an XACML Request Context. Also SAML AttributeStatement may be used to hold SAML Attribute instances. A SAML Assertion may be used to hold SAML AttributeStatement instances in an XACML system, either in an Attribute Repository or in a SAML Response to a SAML AttributeQuery. To transform a SAML Attribute into an XACML Attribute the SAML Assertion includes information that is required and a SAML Assertion or an XACMLAssertion instance contains a SAML Attribute. An XACMLAssertion is an alternative to the SAML Assertion and allows inclusion of XACML Statement instances and inclusion of other XACMLAssertion instance as advice. An XACML PDP or PEP use SAML AttributeQuery to request SAML Attribute instances from an Attribute Authority for use in an XACML Request Context and in response to it SAML Response shall be used to return SAML Attribute instances.
Second, this profile represent the use of SAML for use in requesting, responding with, storing, and transmitting authorization decisions in an XACML system. This category contains XACMLAuthzDecisionStatement, XACMLAssertion, XACMLAuthzDecisionQuery, and XACMLResponse. In this profile, XACMLAuthzDecisionStatement and XACMLAssertion are new SAML extension elements and the others are new SAML extension protocol elements. In an XACML system, XACMLAuthzDecisionSatement may be used to contain XACML authorization decisions for storage or transmission and XACMLAssertion may be used to contain XACMLAuthzDecisionStatement instances for storage or transmission. Also a PEP may use XACMLAuthzDecisionQuery to request an authorization decision from an XACML PDP and an XACML PDP may use XACMLResponse to return authorization decisions in response to an XACMLAuthzDecisionQuery.
Then, this profile shows the use of SAML for use in requesting, responding with, storing and transmitting XACML policies. This category includes four new SAML extensions; XACMLPolicyStatement, XACMLAssertion, XACMLPolicyQuery and XACMLResponse. In an XACML system, XACMLPolicyStatement may hold XACML policies for storage or transmission and XACMLAssertion may hold XACMLPolicySatement instances for storage or transmission. And a PDP or other application uses XACMLPolicyQuery to request XACML from a PAP. Also PAP uses XACMLResponse to return policies in response to an XACMLPolicyQuery.
Finally, this profile details the use of XACMLAssertion instances as advice in other Assertion. This category consists of XACML Advice, which is a new SAML extension element in this profile that may be used for including XACMLAssertion instances as advice in another XACMLAssertion, and XACMLAssertion which is a new SAML extension element that may be used to hold on XACMLAdvice instance along with SAML Statement or XACML extension Statement instance.
Figure 5 describes the XACML use model and the messages that can be used to communicate between the various components. Statements are carried in SAML or XACML Assertions, and Assertions are carried in SAML or XACML Responses. Not all components or messages will be used in every implementation. Next subsection shows the practical example of this model.
The steps of communication between Portal and Web services are described in detail as follows:
Focusing on access control we represent SAML and XACML which are developed by OASIS. SAML is an XML-based framework for exchanging authentication and authorization data. Because SAML has much strength such as platform neutrality, loose coupling of directories, improved online experience for end user, reduced administrative costs for service providers and risk transference. Also SAML is being applied in Web Single Sign-On, Attribute-Based Authorization, and Securing Web Services.
XACML defines XML files which contains access control policy and access control decision request/ response. Policy Decision Point (PDP) looks at the request from Policy Enforcement Point (PEP) and finds some policy applying to the request from Policy Administration Point (PAP) and returns the response about whether access should be granted to PEP.
XACML defines the content of Request/Response messages but does not define protocols or transport mechanisms, which SAML provides by defining schemas for use in requesting and responding with various types of security assertions. This SAML/XACML based access control is a very powerful and practical solution for dynamic and large-scale application domain because it is easier to change and maintain policies. So it can extend the authentication and authorization mechanism within a portal to external Web services.
|[Candolin07]||Candolin, Catharina, "A Security Framework for Service Oriented Architectures", Military Communications Conference, 2007. MILCOM 2007. IEEE, 29-31 Oct. 2007, pp.1-6 http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=4455332|
|[Singhal07]||Singhal , Anoop, "Web Services Security: Challenges and Techniques" policy, Eighth IEEE International Workshop on Policies for Distributed Systems and Networks (POLICY'07), 2007, pp.282 http://www2.computer.org/portal/web/csdl/doi/10.1109/POLICY.2007.50|
|[Madsen05]||Madsen, Paul, et al., "SAML V2.0 Executive Overview", OASIS Committee Draft, 12 April 2005 http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/download.php/13525/sstc-saml-exec-overview-2.0-cd-01-2col.pdf|
|[Ragouzis08]||Ragouzis, Nick, et al., "Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) V2.0 Technical Overview", Committee Draft 02, 25, March 2008, http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/download.php/27819/sstc-saml-tech-overview-2.0-cd-02.pdf|
|[Sun]||"Sun's XACML Implementation", July 2004, http://sunxacml.sourceforge.net/guide.html|
|[Moses05]||Moses, Tim, et al., "eXtensible Access Control Markup Language(XACML) Version 2.0", OASIS Standard, 1 Feb 2005, http://docs.oasis-open.org/xacml/2.0/access_control-xacml-2.0-core-spec-os.pdf|
|[Periorellis07]||Periorellis,Panos , "Securing Web Services: Practical Usage of Standards and Specifications", Idea Group Inc(IGI), 2007. http://books.google.com/books?id=zX2N7fWTJOUC|
|[YIN07]||Yin, Hao, et al., "A SAML/XACML Based Access Control between Portal and Web Services", Data, Privacy, and E-Commerce, 2007. ISDPE 2007. The First International Symposium on, Nov. 2007, pp 356-360 http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=4402710|
|[Anderson05]||Anderson, Anne, et al., "SAML 2.0 profile of XACML v2.0", OASIS Standard, 1 Feb 2005 http://docs.oasis-open.org/xacml/2.0/access_control-xacml-2.0-saml-profile-spec-os.pdf|
|[Jamil08]||Jamil, Ejaz, et al., "What really is SOA. A comparison with Cloud Computing, Web 2.0, SaaS, WOA, Web Services, PassS and others", SOALIB, 12 Dec 2008. http://soalib.com/docs/whitepaper/SoalibWhitePaper_SOAJargon.pdf|
|[Google]||SAML Single Sign-On (SSO) Service for Google Apps, http://code.google.com/apis/apps/sso/saml_reference_implementation.html|
|CORBA||Common Object Request Broker Architecture|
|DCE||Distributed Computing Environment|
|GSA||General Services Administration|
|IDP||General Services Administration|
|J2SE||Java Platform Standard Edition|
|ID-WSF||Identity Web Services Framework|
|LDAP||Lightweight Directory Access Protocol|
|OASIS||the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards|
|PAP||Policy Administration Point|
|PDP||Policy Decision Point|
|PEP||Policy Enforcement Point|
|PIP||Point Information Point|
|SAML||Security Assertion Markup Language|
|SOA||Service Oriented Architecture|
|SOAP||Simple Object Access Protocol|
|SSL||Secure Sockets Layer|
|TLS||Transport Layer Security|
|WSS||Web Security Service|
|XACML||eXtensible Access Control Markup Language|
|XKMS||XML Key Management Specification|
|XML||eXtensible Markup Language|
|XSLT||eXtensible Markup Language|
Last Modified: April, 19, 2009
This and other papers on latest advances in network security are available on line at http://www1.cse .wustl.edu/~jain/cse571-09/index.html
Back to Raj Jain's Home Page

Being An Ethical Hunter
Imagine that you are in the woods during hunting season and you are deer hunting on a piece of property owned by one of your friends. She tells you that there are too many does running around, eating crops and destroying property, and she wants you to help cull the herd. She states that she does not want anyone to shoot the antlered deer just the does. She gives you four special non-antlered damage tags, and you have your own state antlered tags. Does and bucks are legal to harvest. After sitting in the woods for hours, you hear a loud noise. You look over your shoulder and see the biggest antlered deer you have ever seen! He is just over the property line, but appears to be heading towards the fence line. What would you do?
It comes down to a matter of ethics - between what a hunter is allowed to do, and what a hunter should do. The way we think about or judge the right thing to do comes from our surroundings and the people we associate with. The influence on every individual to do the right thing comes from, but is not limited to, the following:
Our individual ethics shape who we are and what we will do...when no one is watching us. It forms our character and defines us as a group of individuals called safe and ethical hunters. Our individual and cultural ethics involving hunting define us - positively or negatively - to other hunters and to the general public who are non-hunters.
Others judge your ethics through your attitude and behavior.

Eighteen years ago, the eminent conservation biologist Gary Meffe warned of what he considered to be the greatest problem in human history – humanity’s inexorable and exponential increase in numbers.
Meffe’s paper, entitled ‘Human Population Control: The Missing Agenda’ published in the journal Conservation Biology, outlined the threats posed by an ever-increasing human population to biodiversity in terms of species extinctions, and to the ecosystem services necessary for our survival. These include water and air purification, hydrologic cycling and food production. Not only is humanity’s deluge drowning the creatures we share the Earth with, but it also runs the risk of submerging itself too. But was this ‘missing agenda’ acknowledged? Was a dam constructed to stem our exponential flow?
Nearly two decades later and we see the publication of the UN’s State of World Population report 2011. It announced that on October 31st we reached the population milestone of seven billion people inhabiting our world. Instead of warning of future population growth and the associated negative impact, it had a more positive tone that encouraged us to ask “What can I do to make our world better?” rather than “Are we too many?” This is the United Nations after all, and understandably it has to take a progressive and reassuring stance rather than one of doom and gloom. But the angle taken is perhaps revealing of the prevailing attitude of the global collective consciousness – population growth is inevitable and cannot be stopped. Of course there’s no such thing as a global collective consciousness, explaining in part why Meffe’s view has been largely ignored, because humanity lacks a collective impetus and so anything that requires mass cohesion, for instance only having one child or reducing carbon emissions, is doomed to fail.
Seven billion people – it’s enough to make you feel insignificant. Except it’s not, it’s just a number. A very big number too large to visualise, grasp or comprehend. Incidentally, if you’re ever having trouble feeling insignificant, then listen to what the ‘Woody Allen’ of science, Lawrence Krauss has to say. In his recent lecture on cosmic connections for The School of Life he stated that “you are much more insignificant than you thought” before going on to compete with Brian Cox for the title of ‘King of making outlandish profound points’, by explaining how we are all quite literally “made of stars”. Every atom in our bodies comes from the remnants of an exploded star. It turns out Moby was right (see video below).
This digression aside, the ineffably large human population will continue to increase and even if we wanted to implement population control, doing so would be unethical and practically speaking impossible. Very few people, not even many devout conservationists, would be willing to sacrifice the right to have children. I for one wouldn’t, it is in our evolutionary spirit.
Instead of tackling the so called ‘root cause’ of the population problem by implementing unrealistic, unfavourable, and unwanted population control, efforts have been directed at addressing offshoot issues such as those relating to overconsumption and overexploitation of natural resources. If we can adopt new cleaner technologies and practices to ensure our impact on the environment is neutral or at least negligible, it will be a step in the right direction.
Just this week the production of a ‘microbial fuel cell’ has been announced which can purportedly produce electricity from human urine! Researchers at the University of the West of England (UWE) have found that by utilising anaerobic bacteria as they metabolise organic waste waters, electrons can be harnessed and useful electricity generated. By ‘useful’ it is meant that enough electricity would be generated to charge a battery say, but presumably not enough to heat a home for instance, yet.
For now, no one is suggesting this is the answer to the world’s problems, but switching to technologies that rely less on finite Earth resources and more on recycling waste products will help ameliorate the effects our species has on the planet. Unfortunately though, those who sing the praises of such advances are often branded with the stigma of being too ‘preachy’. Increasing public apathy to important issues such as clean technology, climate change and biodiversity decline should be at least as worrying to everyone as financial crises or global terrorism.

Idaho State University researchers study newly discovered earthquake fault in Idaho’s Sawtooth Mountains
Posted September 28, 2010
While looking at a highly detailed new topographic image of Idaho’s Sawtooth Range, Idaho State University geosciences professor Glenn Thackray had an "eureka moment" when he discovered a previously unknown active earthquake fault about 65 miles, as the crow flies, from Boise.
The researchers examined a Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) image. LIDAR is a remote sensing system used to collect topographic data with aircraft-mounted lasers capable of recording elevation measurements at a rate of 25,000 pulses per second and can have a vertical precision of about six inches. The images can be displayed so they don't show an area's vegetation. Four years ago while doing some research on glaciers in the Sawtooth Range, Thackray was examining a high-resolution, "bare-earth" LIDAR image of the mountains: this is when he noticed a line running through the image in the vicinity of Redfish Lake.
"The black line stood out and I thought that it had to be an earthquake fault," Thackray said. "It was long suspected that there was an active fault in the Sawtooths, but without the LIDAR technology it would have been exceptionally hard to find."
Since that time, ISU researchers have been on the ground documenting the fault that is at least 25 miles long and could be as long as 40 miles. It is located on the eastern edge of the range and comes within about five miles from the town of Stanley. A portion of it runs through the upper end of Redfish Lake. It runs along the range approximately from near Stanley Lake to at least as far south as Petitt Lake.
“The reason this discovery is so important is that it is within the heavily visited areas of the Sawtooth National Recreation area, very close to the town of Stanley, and within 65 miles of Idaho’s largest city, Boise, and the most populated area in the state,” Thackray said. “We would like to know how big the earthquakes are along this fault and how active it is.”
Thackray emphasized that the fault is cause for concern, but not alarm, for visitors to and residents of the Stanley-Sawtooth area, and to the residents of the Wood River or Boise valleys. The discovery may have implications for land-use and emergency planning, and perhaps building codes. Depending on the magnitude of a potential earthquake, it could do damage to surrounding areas.
There are few major, active faults in Idaho. Idaho’s three other major faults run along the base of the Lost River Range (where the famous Borah Peak magnitude 7.3 earthquake, the largest ever recorded in Idaho, occurred in 1983), the Lemhi Range and the Beaverhead Range. Faults are break in the earth’s crust, along which rocks and the earth move. Typically, the earth is moving up on one side of the fault, and moving down on the other.
"It's the movement of the rocks that are important. That is what creates an earthquake hazard," Thackray said.
After discovering the fault on the LIDAR image and then confirming its existence on the ground, ISU researchers had to determine whether it was an active fault, defined as a fault that has featured an earthquake within the last 10,000 years. Determining whether the fault was active was a challenge for the researchers because most of the fault is located within the Sawtooth Wilderness and Recreation Area.
"Normally, to test a fault you could take in a Cat or backhoe and dig up sediment and rock and use carbon dating to date the occurrence of previous activity," Thackray said. "But we couldn’t do that because the fault is in a wilderness area."
This is where a little luck and scientific serendipity came into play. Other ISU researchers, biological sciences professor Bruce Finney, postdoctoral researcher Mark Shapley, and ISU geosciences graduate student Eric Johnson, were doing lake sediment core sampling of lakes in the Sawtooths, including Redfish Lake, to study the historical record of sockeye salmon returning to the area. While drilling through the sediment in the upper portion of Redfish Lake the researchers hit levels where there were landslide deposits interrupted the regular accumulation of sediment deposits.
"We were able to date the occurrence of the most recent fault activity by using those drilling samples from the large landslides in Redfish Lake," Thackray said.
"There is a lot that we still don’t know about this fault, but our studies have revealed the outline of its history," he added.

When you create an input form in Microsoft Excel, understanding how to make the application work for you can save hours of manual input. If you want to narrow question responses to specific options, you can use a drop-down response menu. These instructions are written for Excel 2010, so the steps may vary slightly if you use a different version.
Enter each of the items that you want to appear in the pull-down list on a new worksheet in your Excel workbook. Place one item per cell with each one listed in an adjacent cell. For example, list the items in columns with one option each in cells A1, A2, A3 and so on. You could also list them in a row with one in each cell, such as A1, B1 and C1, until all your data is listed. The drop-down will be ordered based on the entries, so organize the items accordingly.
Highlight all of the cells in the list. Right-click your mouse and choose "Define Name" from the menu. Create a name for the list and enter it in the "Name" field. Do not use spaces in the name. Click "OK." This name is only used to select the list for the drop-down; it does not appear for users.
Click the cell where you want to create the drop-down menu. Select the "Data Tools" section by clicking "Data." Choose "Data Validation" and click "Settings." Select "List" in the Allow field.
Click the "Source Name" input field and type a "=" followed immediately by the name you assigned to the list on the previous worksheet. For example, if your list was named "options," type "=options" in the source name field.
Click the check box beside "in-cell dropdown" so that the drop menu appears in the cell. If you want to require that responders choose an option, clear the "Ignore blank" check box.
Click "Input Message" to set a message to users when the cell is clicked. This is a good place to explain what selection you want the user to make or other specifics. Leave it blank if you do not want to use this feature.
Navigate to the "Error Alert" tab. Click the check box beside the option to show an error notice if invalid data is entered. Use the provided text fields to set the contents of the message. Clear the check box if you do not want the message to appear.

As Christo Pantev prowled the halls of Toronto's Baycrest Center for Geriatric Care he was struck, over and over, by the vitality of many of the elderly patients who played a musical instrument.
"I saw much more activity in these people than in the others," says Pantev, a neuroscientist at the center's Rotman Research Institute.
He saw a difference even among those who were slipping over the edge into dementia. Memory begins to fade as the patients slide toward that dark abyss, but the last thing that goes — the last bit of memory — he says, is their ability to remember music.
And he thinks he may know why.
Musician and Scientist
He has developed evidence over the years that the study of music may change the way the human brain is wired. And that has kept him on a course that has guided nearly his entire professional career.
He has a few questions he would like to answer, including: Does learning a skill, like playing the violin, physically change the brain and improve cognitive and perceptive skills among children, and maybe even stave off mental illness among the elderly?
Maybe, he reasons, the intense concentration and the long hours of practice that make someone a skilled musician have benefits that far outweigh the rewards of playing a musical instrument.
Those are tall questions, but Pantev has spent the last few years laying the groundwork for research that is just getting underway at the institute. As a child, Pantev spent years studying the violin, and it became his passion.
Even today, he says, "If I work, I have to hear music."
In time, the violin gave way to neuroscience, but it was to return later as a key player in his research.
While working at the University of Muenster's Institute for Experimental Audiology in Germany, Panlev and a colleague began studying people who had lost a limb to see how their brains adapted to their new environment. It was known that persons who had lost a hand sometimes felt pain, or other sensations, in their fingers, even though the hand was no longer there.
The researchers used sensitive equipment that could measure electric activity and magnetic fields in the brain to see which areas were active when the person reported feeling "phantom pain" in the missing limb. The results, published in a 1995 issue of the journal Nature, showed that other parts of the body commandeered the neurons formerly used by the missing limb.
If the lip took over those neurons, for example, simply biting the lip caused the person to feel pain in the phantom limb.
The research showed that the brain adapted to its new environment by rewiring itself, and that led Pantev to his next question. "Can we modify the functional brain organization by training?" he asks.
Playing Violin, Wearing a Helmet
To answer that, the researchers needed a model, something they could test to see if training had a measurable impact on the brain. Pantev knew from his own experience that playing the violin required far more dexterity in the left hand than the right.
"The right hand is much less involved," he says.
Pantev, the violinist, thus supplied Pantev, the neuroscientist, with "the perfect model."
Like the research into phantom pain, the difference between the use of the left hand as opposed to the right gave the researchers something to measure in the brain. Over time, they reasoned, practicing the violin several hours a day should cause a neurological shift in the brain.

Australian Bureau of Statistics
1301.0 - Year Book Australia, 2009–10
Previous ISSUE Released at 11:30 AM (CANBERRA TIME) 04/06/2010
|Page tools: Print Page RSS Search this Product|
FEATURE ARTICLE: HOUSEHOLDS AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
Householders have increased their use of energy saving measures in their homes. In 2008, 59% of households had energy saving lighting installed (up from 33% in 2005) (graph 2.40); and energy star ratings were the main household consideration when replacing refrigerators, freezers, dishwashers and clothes dryers. Counteracting this, graph 2.39 shows more households now own coolers (66% in 2008 up from 35% in 1999) and dishwashers (45% in 2008 up from 30% in 1999) and other appliances, such as LCD and plasma televisions, the latter using almost three times the amount of energy compared to a standard television (End note 6).
Types of energy
Electricity is the main energy source used in people's homes. In 2007-08, about half (49%) of the energy used by households was sourced from electricity. Household electricity consumption rose to 210 petajoules (PJ) in 2007-08, up 48% from 1990-91 (ABARE, 2009).
In March 2008, electricity was the primary source throughout Australia for household cooking (three-quarters of ovens used electricity and more than half (56%) of cooktops) and for hot water systems (46%). There has been a fall in the use of electricity for hot water systems between 2002 and 2008 from 61% to 46%.
Of those homes with heaters, electricity was the main source of energy for space heating (45%), followed by gas (41% for mains gas and LPG/bottled together) and wood (13%).
Natural gas is the second most common source of energy used in the home, used by more than six in ten households (61%) in 2008. In total, households used 137 PJ of natural gas in 2007-08, equivalent to almost a third (32%) of total household energy use (ABARE, 2009).
For almost one in three Australian households (31%), gas (mains or LPG/bottled) was the main source of energy for space heating and 37% used gas for hot water systems. In the main gas-producing states of Victoria and Western Australia, gas was used as an energy source in nine out of ten households (90% and 87% respectively, compared with six out of ten households nationally).
Used primarily as a source of heating, wood use by households has declined 26% in the last 10 years, from 82 PJ in 1997-98 to 60 PJ in 2007-08 (ABARE, 2009).
In 2008, 13% of Australian households used wood as a source of energy in the home. More than one-third (35%) of households in Tasmania used wood as an energy source, a decrease from more than half (52%) in 2002 (graph 2.41). Due to air pollution concerns, households have been encouraged to stop using wood for heating or to convert open fires to slow combustion fires, which are more energy efficient and produce less greenhouse emissions than open fires. Firewood collection can have a detrimental effect on Australia's native wildlife, as dead trees and fallen timber provide habitat for a diverse range of fauna including a number of threatened species (End note 7).
A range of government grants and rebates have been made available to households in recent years to encourage people to use solar energy in the home. In 2008, 7% of households used solar energy to heat water, up from 4% of households in 2005. More than half of all households in the Northern Territory used solar energy to heat water (54%) - a much larger proportion than in Western Australia (21%) and no other state or territory exceeded 10% (graph 2.42).
GreenPower provides an option for people to pay a premium for electricity generated from renewable sources that is fed into the national power grid. GreenPower was first established in New South Wales in 1997 and since then has spread to other states and territories. By March 2009, just over 984,000 households were paying for GreenPower, up from 132,300 customers in March 2005 (End note 8).
There has also been an increase in the awareness of GreenPower products in the past decade. In 1999, less than one-fifth (19%) of households were aware of GreenPower. Nearly a decade later, this had risen to more than half (52%) of all households in 2008, including 5% who reported that they were already paying for GreenPower.
Households in the Australian Capital Territory had the highest rate of GreenPower awareness (71%, including 5% who were paying for GreenPower) while Western Australian households had the lowest awareness (39%) (graph 2.43).
Biomass is plant material, vegetation or agricultural waste used as a fuel or energy source. Biomass can also be processed to produce liquid biofuels (biodiesel) or a gas biofuel (biogas).
Hydro-electric power is electricity produced from the energy of falling water using dams, turbines and generators.
Solar/solar photovoltaic: Photovoltaics (PV) convert sunlight directly into electricity. Photovoltaic systems differ from solar hot water systems that absorb sunlight directly into the water-carrying tubes contained in the panel.
Wind turbines can be used to drive a generator to create electricity.
1. Australian Energy Regulator, State of Electricity Market 2008, viewed 22 January 2009, <http://www.aer.gov.au>
2. Department of Climate Change (DCC), Australia's National Greenhouse Accounts: National Inventory by Economic Sector 2007, last viewed 20 October 2009, <http://www.climatechange.gov.au/inventory>
3. Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE), Energy Update 2009, electronic datasets, viewed 22 September 2009, <http://www.abare.gov.au>
4. Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE), Energy Update 2009, Table f, viewed 22 September 2009, <http://www.abare.gov.au>
5. Department of Climate Change (DCC), Australia's National Greenhouse Accounts: National Inventory by Economic Sector 2007, DCC, 2009, Canberra.
6. Energy Australia, Typical Household Appliance Wattages, viewed 29 January 2009, <http://www.energy.com.au>.
7. Department of Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts, Land pressures, viewed 28 October 2009, <http://www.environment.gov.au/land>
8. GreenPower, You Can Bank on GreenPower, viewed 26 November 2008, <http://www.greenpower.gov.au>.
This page last updated 21 January 2013
Unless otherwise noted, content on this website is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 Australia Licence together with any terms, conditions and exclusions as set out in the website Copyright notice. For permission to do anything beyond the scope of this licence and copyright terms contact us.

A study in the Canadian Medical Association Journal of 937,943 children finds that boys born in December were 30 percent more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD than classmates born in January of the same calendar year. December-born girls were 70 percent more likely to have an ADHD diagnosis. Similar patterns existed for rates of ADHD prescriptions. The cut-off date of birth for school entry in British Columbia is December 31, so children born in December are almost a year younger than classmates born in January.
The researchers were concerned that these younger children were simply acting younger compared with their older classmates and may have been wrongly diagnosed. “These findings raise concerns about the potential harms of overdiagnosis and overprescribing,” they wrote.
For more on the diagnosis of ADHD in Psychiatric News, click here.
(Image: Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com)

Australian National Botanic Gardens
A weekly news sheet prepared by a Gardens' volunteer.
Numbers in square brackets  refer to garden bed Sections. Plants in flower are in bold type.
11 February 2005
Rhododendron lochiae - click for larger image
This is a short walk abounding with colourful flowers to suit those with little time. On entering the gardens throught the main gates, the expanse of grasses with tall graceful nodding ochre flower heads is mostly of the kangaroo grass, Themeda australis [Section 175]. In the pots at the entrance to the Visitors Centre, plants include Rhododendron lochiae with bright red trumpet flowers on a low spreading shrub and a ground cover Goodenia sp. with bright yellow flowers. These are seen below the large arching fronds of the Birds Nest Fern, Asplenium australasicum. Against the wall a wattle, Acacia mollifolia [Section 221] is a tall, slender shrub reaching towards the path, with fine divided velvety leaves and sprays of golden fluffy flower balls.
The background to the statue of Sir Joseph Banks is Banksia serrata [Section 172], tall with dark foliage and large cylindrical green-grey flower spikes seen mostly at the tops of these shrubs. Banks Walk is edged with numerous, still colourful, kangaroo paws. They include Anigozanthos Bush Dawn [Section 210] with bright yellow paw flowers on long bare stems, Anigozanthos Bush Noon [Section 210] with yellow-orange coloured flowers and Anigozanthos Bush Glow [Section 210] with flowers coloured red. Prostrate and brilliant, Scaevola New Blue [Section 210, 174] have vivid blue flowers along the dense trailing stems. Below the notice Add colour to your garden with Australian Plants is another prostrate plant, Pelargonium rodneyanum [Section 174] with attractive magenta coloured flowers over the suckering plant.
Anigozanthos 'Bush Glow' - click for larger image
At the corner the attractive small shrubs, Crowea Festival [Section 174] are clad with pink star flowers. In the crescent garden, a suckering herb, Brachyscome formosa [Section 174] bears mauve daisies and Goodenia humilis [Section 174] is small and mounded with its yellow flowers to complement. Dampiera sylvestris [Section 174] is close by with its blue flowers on upright stems. Opposite and in the centre of the garden the glorious orange-red flowers crowning the Eucalyptus ficifolia [Section 174] could not be missed. Cross over the car park to the Tasmanian Section where probably many Gippsland Water Dragons, Physignathus lesueurii howittii [Section 149] can be seen basking in the sun. Entering this section, the NSW Christmas Bush, Ceratopetalum gummiferum [Section 142] displays its renowned reddened swollen calyces which followed the tiny white flowers, mostly at the top of the tall shrub.
This next section is in front of the Café building in the Ellis Rowan Garden where the Grevillea Deua Flame [Section 131] is a rather dense shrub which dangles its lovely red terminal flower clusters from pendulous branches. Opposite, a grouping of Crowea Coopers Hybrid [Section 240] is floriferous with its shade of pink star flowers. On the opposite side of this garden is a colourful patch containing Goodenia macmillanii [Section 240] with small upright stems of pink flowers, surrounded by Scaevola New Blue [Section 240], with its flowers so blue and behind, Senecio sturtianum [Section 240] with deep purple flowers and grey-green foliage on upright stems.
So many flowers to enjoy Barbara Daly.

This is the time of year Gulf Coast residents begin watching the weather reports to see if there is a storm and if it is heading their way.
It would be wise if we watched, as well. And prepared accordingly.
Think back to October 1995, when Hurricane Opal hit the Florida Panhandle. It remained a hurricane for the next 12 hours as it roared deep into Alabama. Fifty mph winds were felt as far north as Montgomery. Anniston got more than six inches of rain in a few hours. Power outages erupted throughout the state. The system spun off tornadoes and caused extensive damage all the way to Tennessee.
More recently, Hurricane Ivan, which made landfall near Gulf Shores in September 2004, sent the wind gusting at more than 60 mph in central Alabama and caused more power outages, more tornados and more rain.
Now Ernesto is taking aim at the Gulf Coast.
Although Alabama is not currently in the cone of uncertainty, anyone who follows the weather knows hurricanes can change course. Our ability to predict where and when a storm will strike improves every year, but it is still an imperfect science.
However, this much we do know: It is better to be prepared, just in case.
When serious weather looms, make sure you have working flashlights and a weather radio with plenty of batteries. Keep your cell phones charged, keep gas in your car, and if you have a freezer, and there is room in it, pack in a couple of bags of ice, the most valuable commodity when the power goes out. Some bottled water and non-perishable food would be wise — and an old fashioned can-opener, the kind that does not need electricity. You can figure out the rest.
Little things become big things when you find yourself in the cone of uncertainty.

Genetic model organisms have revolutionized science, and today, with the rapid advances in technology, there is significant potential to launch many more plant species towards model status. However, these new model organisms have to be carefully selected.
Hemerocallis (the daylily) satisfies multiple criteria for selection and deserves serious consideration as a subject of intensive biological investigation. Several attributes of the genus are of great biological interest. These include the strict control of flower opening and, within a short period, the precisely regulated floral death by a programmed cell death system. The self-incompatibility system in Hemerocallis is also noteworthy and deserves more attention. Importantly, the genus is widely cultivated for food, medicinal value and ornamental interest. Hemerocallis has considerable potential as a ‘nutraceutical’ food plant and the source of new compounds with biomedical activity. The genus has also been embraced by ornamental plant breeders and the extraordinary morphological diversity of hybrid cultivars, produced within a relatively short time by amateur enthusiasts, is an exceptional resource for botanical and genetic studies.
This paper in AoB PLANTS explores these points in detail, explaining the reasons why this genus has considerable value – both academic and socio-economic – and deserves new resources devoted to its exploration as a model. Its impact as a future model will be enhanced by its amenability to cultivation in laboratory and field conditions. In addition, established methods for various tissue and cell culture systems as well as transformation will permit maximum exploitation of this genus by science.
Rodriguez-Enriquez, M.J., and Grant-Downton, R.T. (2012) A new day dawning: Hemerocallis (daylily) as a future model organism. AoB Plants 5: pls055 doi: 10.1093/aobpla/pls055

Discover the cosmos! Each day a different image or photograph of our fascinating universe is featured, along with a brief explanation written by a professional astronomer.
2001 July 22
Explanation: The Orion Nebula is visible to the unaided eye as a fuzzy patch near the famous belt of three stars in the Orion. The above picture captures a part of the Orion Nebula that primarily reflects light from bright Orion stars. This reflection nebula appears blue because the blue light from the neighboring stars scatters more efficiently from nebula gas than does red light. The dark lanes are composed of mostly interstellar dust - fine needle-shaped carbon grains.
Authors & editors:
Jerry Bonnell (USRA)
NASA Technical Rep.: Jay Norris. Specific rights apply.
A service of: LHEA at NASA/ GSFC
& Michigan Tech. U.

Discover the cosmos! Each day a different image or photograph of our fascinating universe is featured, along with a brief explanation written by a professional astronomer.
2001 December 20
Explanation: Viewed from Earth, the solar system's planets do a cosmic dance that is hard to appreciate on any single night. But consider this well planned animated sequence combining 23 pictures taken at approximately 2 week intervals from June 2000 through May 2001. It reveals the graceful looping or retrograde motion of bright wanderers Jupiter (leftmost) and Saturn. Loitering among the background stars are the familiar Pleiades (above right) and V-shaped Hyades (below left) star clusters. The planets didn't actually loop by reversing the direction of their orbits, though. Their apparent retrograde motion is a reflection of the motion of the Earth itself. Retrograde motion can be seen each time Earth overtakes and laps planets orbiting farther from the Sun, Earth moving more rapidly through its own relatively close-in orbit. Astronomer Tunc Tezel captured Jupiter and Saturn's "paired" retrograde loop in this remarkable series made after the close alignment of these gas giants in May 2000. The next opportunity to see these two planets dance such a pas de deux will be in the year 2020.
Authors & editors:
Jerry Bonnell (USRA)
NASA Technical Rep.: Jay Norris. Specific rights apply.
A service of: LHEA at NASA/ GSFC
& Michigan Tech. U.

Discover the cosmos! Each day a different image or photograph of our fascinating universe is featured, along with a brief explanation written by a professional astronomer.
2007 August 9
Explanation: Gathered at the center of this sharp skyview are the stars of Messier 67, one of the oldest known open star clusters. In fact, though open star clusters are usually much younger, the stars of M67 are likely around 4 billion years old, about the same age and with about the same elemental abundances as the Sun. Open clusters are almost always younger because they are dispersed over time as they encounter other stars, interstellar clouds, and experience gravitational tides while orbiting the center of our galaxy. Still, M67 contains over 500 stars or so and lies some 2,800 light-years away in the constellation Cancer. At that estimated distance, M67 would be about 12 light-years across.
Authors & editors:
Jerry Bonnell (UMCP)
NASA Official: Phillip Newman Specific rights apply.
A service of: ASD at NASA / GSFC
& Michigan Tech. U.

July 31, 1998
Explanation: Do you recognize the constellation Orion? This striking but unfamiliar looking picture of the familiar Orion region of the sky was produced using survey data from the InfraRed Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). It combines information recorded at three different invisible infrared wavelengths in a red, green, and blue color scheme and covers about 30x24 degrees on the sky. Most of Orion's visually impressive stars don't stand out, but bright Betelgeuse does appear as a small purplish dot just above center. Immediately to the right of Betelgeuse and prominent in the IRAS skyview, expanding debris from a stellar explosion, a supernova remnant, is seen as a large bright ring-shaped feature. The famous gas clouds in Orion's sword glow brightly as the yellow regions at the lower right. No longer operational, IRAS used a telescope cooled by liquid helium to detect celestial infrared radiation.
Authors & editors:
NASA Technical Rep.: Jay Norris. Specific rights apply.
A service of: LHEA at NASA/ GSFC
&: Michigan Tech. U.

|The German inflation of 1923
— one dollar worth trillions of marks.
[This article is excerpted from the book The Age of Inflation, by Hans Sennholz.]
The German inflation of 1914–1923 had an inconspicuous beginning, a creeping rate of one to two percent. On the first day of the war, the German Reichsbank, like the other central banks of the belligerent powers, suspended redeemability of its notes in order to prevent a run on its gold reserves.
Like all the other banks, it offered assistance to the central government in financing the war effort. Since taxes are always unpopular, the German government preferred to borrow the needed amounts of money rather than raise its taxes substantially. To this end it was readily assisted by the Reichsbank, which discounted most treasury obligations.
A growing percentage of government debt thus found its way into the vaults of the central bank and an equivalent amount of printing press money into people’s cash holdings. In short, the central bank was monetizing the growing government debt.
By the end of the war the amount of money in circulation had risen fourfold and prices some 140 percent. Yet the German mark had suffered no more than the British pound, was somewhat weaker than the American dollar but stronger than the French franc. Five years later, in December 1923, the Reichsbank had issued 496.5 quintillion marks, each of which had fallen to one-trillionth of its 1914 gold value.
How stupendous! Practically every economic good and service was costing trillions of marks. The American dollar was quoted at 4.2 trillion marks, the American penny at 42 billion marks. How could a European nation that prided itself on its high levels of education and scholarly knowledge suffer such a thorough destruction of its money? Who would inflict on a great nation such evil which had ominous economic, social, and political ramifications not only for Germany but for the whole world? Was it the victors of World War I who, in diabolical revenge, devastated the vanquished country through ruinous financial manipulation and plunder? Every mark was printed by Germans and issued by a central bank that was governed by Germans under a government that was purely German. It was German political parties, such as the Socialists, the Catholic Centre Party, and the Democrats, forming various coalition governments, that were solely responsible for the policies they conducted. Of course, admission of responsibility for any calamity cannot be expected from any political party.
|How could a European nation that prided itself on its high levels of education and scholarly knowledge suffer such a thorough destruction of its money?|
The reasoning that led these parties to inflate the national currency at such astronomical rates is not only interesting for economic historians, but also very revealing of the rationale for monetary destruction. The doctrines and theories that led to the German monetary destruction have since then caused destruction in many other countries. In fact, they may be at work right now all over the western world. In our judgment, four erroneous doctrines or theories guided the German monetary authorities in those baleful years.
The most amazing economic sophism that was advanced by eminent financiers, politicians, and economists endeavored to show that there was neither monetary nor credit inflation in Germany. These experts readily admitted that the nominal amount of paper money issued was indeed enormous. But the real value of all currency in circulation, that is, the gold value in terms of gold or goods prices, they argued, was much lower than before the war or than that of other industrial countries.

Contents - Previous - Next
This is the old United Nations University website. Visit the new site at http://unu.edu
Because the imminent demise or depletion of commercially usable natural forests can be so readily foreseen in many Pacific Island countries (Watt 1980, 297), governments and development agencies have in several places promoted either some form of restocking or enrichment of commercially logged areas or the establishment of forest plantations on degraded grassland sites. Not all these efforts can be classified as agroforestry, strictly speaking; but in the Pacific context, as in most of the tropical world, the traditional, if transient, shift of land use back and forth between forest and agriculture on any particular site makes it relevant to consider what at first glance appear to be purely forestry projects.
Many of the timber species institutionally promoted have been exotics such as Caribbean pine (Pinus caribaea), West Indian mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla), cordia (Cordia alliodora), and Eucalytus spp., although some indigenous Pacific species such as Albizia falcataria, Agathis spp., Araucaria spp., and Endospermum spp. have been successfully established, often as exotics in areas beyond their natural range. Many other species - including West Indian cedar (Cedrela odorata), the silky oak (Grevillea robusta), teak (Tectona grandis), mahogany (Swietenia mahogoni), toon tree ( Toona australis), cadamba (Anthocephalus chinensis), and Albizia lebbeck along with several indigenous trees - have also been the subject of trials, and planted to various degrees throughout the islands.
Firewood and multi-purpose species that have been successfully introduced include Leucaena leucocephala, Erythrina spp., Casuarina spp., and Gliricidia septum, and, to a lesser extent, Securinega samoana and Adenanthera pavonina. Other species, all of which have been planted experimentally and which seem to grow successfully, but which have not yet become so well established, include Cassia, Acacia, and Calliandra spp. Apart from timber and fuel wood, the major multi-purpose objectives of such plantings are site reclamation and amelioration, erosion control, wind protection, shade, multipurpose construction and handicrafts, nurse cropping, fodder, green manure, and food.
The indigenous casuarinas, particularly Casuarina equisetifolia, have also shown considerable promise for reforestation programmes, and have been planted in Tonga in land reclamation projects, in the Cook Islands for the rehabilitation of degraded lands, and on atolls as sources of fuel wood and to protect coconut plantations from saltwater damage. C. oligodon and C. papuana are traditionally used for reforestation and to enrich fallow land in Papua New Guinea, and are now promoted in some areas for land rehabilitation and as shade plants for coffee.
Pine planting in relation to agroforestry
Of the total area of timber plantations in the Pacific, well over 50 per cent is accounted for by Caribbean pine (Pinus caribaea). The largest area of pine planting is in Fiji, where that country's Pine Commission together with the Forestry Department has established over 50,000 ha of plantation since 1960, mostly on degraded anthropogenic grasslands (Drysdale 1988a, 110; Watt 1980, 301). Some pine timber is used locally, but the wood was intended mainly for export, and a wood-chipping mill is now in operation. In the mid1960s, under a programme now discontinued, woodlots of Pinus caribaea on smallholder sugar-cane farms were promoted by the colonial government.
Sized from 0.4 to 2 ha, these woodlots were planted on steeper non-cane areas of farms to control erosion, provide on-farm supplies of timber and fuel wood, and for undergrazing by farm animals (Eaton 1988b, personal communication). Apart from this woodlot grazing and grazing of cattle in association with larger pine plantations (described below), there has been no institutional support for any form of intercropping or other agroforestry activities in pine plantations (Drysdale 1988b).
Similarly, in the limited areas of pine planting in New Caledonia, Western Samoa, Tonga, and the Cook Islands, there has been little or no link to agroforestry in such programmes, with the main focus being on creating a timber resource, land improvement, erosion control, and employment creation in rural areas.
In highland Papua New Guinea large areas of degraded grassland have been planted with pines (Pinus spp.) and Araucaria spp. Intercropping activities are few and consist of the intercropping of coffee and cardamon on a trial and demonstration basis (Howcroft 1983).
In Vanuatu, P. caribaea var. hondurensis is the main species planted in forest plantations in seasonally dry and highly degraded sites on the southern islands of Aneityum and Erromango, where some 550 ha had been established up to April 1985. The commercial viability of such plantings is still uncertain, however, due to poor access to markets and high transport costs. On Erromango, high costs of clearing land of the indigenous pioneering species Acacia spirobis has stopped the development of pine plantations. Benefits in the form of erosion control and aiding the local economy through wages were the main motives behind these programmes (Neil 1986a).
Non-pine forestry in relation to agroforestry
To judge from programmes in Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Tonga, and Western Samoa, there seems to be greater promise and greater institutionalized promotion of intercropping with other, primarily broadleaved evergreen, species than has been the case with pines.
In Papua New Guinea, where extensive areas of Eucalyptus deglupta have been planted, cocoa and coffee have been successfully grown at 4 m x 4 m and 3 m x 3 m spacing, respectively, in conjunction with E. deglupta planted at 10 m x 10 m (Jacovelli and Neil 1984, 10).
Also in Papua New Guinea, severe environmental degradation resulting from rapid urban expansion and associated subsistence gardening and "fuel-wood mining" prompted the cities of Lae and Port Moresby to institute fuel-wood-planting programmes. In Lae, in 1978, it was decided to plant 200 ha of sloping land (20°-30°) in Leucaena leucocephala for firewood and to intercrop fuel-wood species with annual food crops in zones designated for subsistence food gardening. The project, which was allocated K250,000 (US$275,000) over six years, had a management component coupled with a public education programme and a team of local government rangers to control gardening and to police the area (King 1987). Follow-on projects were planned but not carried out because of lack of funding. By 1988 the project had ceased to operate, and the original plantings of some 100 ha of L. Ieucocephala, Acacia auriculformis, and Eucalyptus spp. and 5 ha of "agroforestry plantings" of fuel-wood species with food crops had been cut down or removed completely (King 1987).
In Vanuatu, Cordia alliodora, a hardwood native to Central America, has been the main commercial silvicultural species since the mid-1970s, with over 1,000 ha planted on 12 islands as of 1984 (Neil 1984). Cordia was first planted on various islands in 5-10-ha blocks called Local Supply Plantations (LSP). As the potential contribution of forestry to rural and national development became evident, larger, export-oriented Industrial Forest Plantations (IFP) were established on the islands of Pentecost, Erromango, and Aneityum (Jacovelli and Neil 1984). The rapid expansion of IFPs, sometimes with plantings of up to 200 ha per year on single sites, led to unprecedented demands for land and aroused fears among landowners, especially on Pentecost, that these silvicultural activities would make land unavailable for planting subsistence and commercial crops. This prompted the Vanuatu Forest Service to establish, on Pentecost in 1984, demonstration plots growing a wider range of subsistence and cash crops within forestry plantations of Cordia alliodora (Jacovelli and Neil 1984).
Crops established between line plantings of Cordia alliodora included 8 sweet potato cultivars, 6 cassava cultivars, 13 aroid cultivars from Colocasia esculenta, Xanthosoma sagittifolium, and Alocasia macrorrhiza, 12 yam cultivars, kava (Piper methysticum), and trials with coffee (Arabica and Robusta), cocoa, and cardamon. In addition to these trials, subsistence gardens have also been established under Cordia alliodora by both local landowners and forest workers alike (Jacovelli and Neil 1984, 8).
Because C. alliodora may be severely attacked by root rot (Phelli nus noxius) in some conditions, and does not perform well on some sites, other species currently being tried in Vanuatu include Terminalia brassii, T. calamansanai, Eucalyptus deglupta, Swietenia macrophylla, Toona australis, and Cedrela odorata. However, the barks of both T. brassii and E. deglupta are palatable to cattle (Jacovelli and Neil 1984, 10; MacFarlane 1980). The species showing greatest potential as an alternative species to C. alliodora may be S. macrophylla, and if grown with nurse species to reduce pest problems, intercropping should be possible during the early years of rotation (Neil 1986b).
Several other systematic experiments on tree species, both exotic and indigenous, have been carried out in Vanuatu in a search for species especially suitable for fuel wood, timber, or pulpwood, but none of this research was connected with agroforestry. Research on agroforestry has focused almost exclusively on "cash crops which appear to have great potential, particularly coffee and cocoa, and possibly kava and cocoa" (Jacovelli and Neil 1984, 11).
In Fiji, some 22,953 ha of tropical hardwood forests have been planted as of mid-1986. Of these, 14,987 ha are West Indian mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla), 3,058 ha are Cordia alliodora, 2,963 ha are cadamba (Anthocephalus chinensis), 928 ha are Maesopsis eminii, 438 ha are Eucalyptus deglupta, and 202 ha are the indigenous species Endospermum macrophyllum (ADAB 1986). Despite such considerable silvicultural activity, in terms of both hardwood and pines, it is essentially monocultural, and, as the General Manager of the Fiji Pine Commission has stated: "Institutionalized agrosilviculture is non-existent in Fiji at present" (Drysdale 1988b, personal communication).
Tonga's silvicultural activities are more diverse, some being significantly agrosilvicultural. More purely silvicultural activities include a major reforestation programme begun on the island of Eua in the mid-1960s. Over 40 ha of mixed exotic species including Toona australis, Cedrela odorata, Cordia alliodora, Grevillea robusta, Agathis robusta, Pinus caribaea, and Eucalyptus spp., as well as suitable indigenous species, such as Casuarina equisetifolia, Terminalia catappa, and Dysoxylum tongense, were planted on the Eua Forest Farm. Tests of seed stock from throughout the world were also carried out on the farm. Larger areas were subsequently planted, with 104 ha alone being planted in 1979 (Thaman 1984e, 3).
The species most commonly planted in 1984 were Eucalyptus saligna, E. tereticornis, Toona australis, and Pinus caribaea. Seedling pro auction for these species and other timber species, such as Cupressus lusitanica, amounted to 77,491 seedlings (42,427 of which were planted) in 1979 (MAFF 1985, 100-102). Reforestation continues, as the small areas of remaining indigenous forest on Eua are exploited, with the local mill "approaching the end of its productive life as the local hardwood timber supply is cut out and cannot be replaced from the Forest Farm for at least another 10 years" (MAFF 1985, 99). The only truly agroforestry aspect of the Eua silvicultural activities, a taungya system of combined tree-planting and temporary gardens, was phased out because "it has greatly increased pressures for settlement of unsuitable land, and is thus clearly not in the national interest" (MAFF 1985, 100).
A second and continuing agroforestry activity has been the Forestry Extension Programme, which began in the 1960s to produce seedlings for distribution to smallholder farmers for planting in small woodlots or as windbreaks around their agricultural allotments (see chapter 5 on Tongan agroforestry). The major species distributed included Casuarina equisetifolia, Grevillea robusta, Cedrela odorata, Eucalyptus spp., Agathis spp., and Gmelina arborea (Thaman 1984e, 3).
With the establishment of the Extension Nursery at Mataliku on the main island of Tongatapu in 1978, the programme was expanded to include the propagation and distribution of a wide range of timber trees, "cultural" species, and species providing food, medicine, and ornamentation. The considerable interest shown by the people for planting on both rural and town allotments led to a "blossoming of forest extension work" to the point that, in 1978, the nursery could not cope with the demand, which exceeded 8,000 trees per month (MAFF 1979, 99).
According to programme records, as of 1984, at least 155 species had been tested and/or propagated for distribution on Eua and Tongatapu. Of these, 66 were timber species, 45 ornamentals, 32 "cultural" plants of particular importance to the Tongan society, 11 food plants, 6 plants used for coastal protection or land reclamation, 4 for living fences or hedgerows, 3 medicinal plants, and 2 each for windbreaks and firewood. Among the most popular nontimber species were Casuarina equisetifolia (planted as an ornamental, living fence, or wind-break); culturally important sacred or fragrant plants, known locally as akau kakala, such as heilala (Garcinia sessilis), langakali (Aglaia saltatorum), sandalwood, or ahi (Santalum yasi), pua (Fagraea berteriana), pipi (Parinari glaberrima), huni (Phalaria disperma), perfume tree, or mohokoi (Cananga odorata), allspice (Pimenta doica), and Pandanus cultivars; fruit-trees, such as mango, Malay apple (Syzygium malaccense), and macadamia nut (Macadamia integrifolia); and ornamental or shade plants, such as flamboyant, or poinciana (Delonix regia), hibiscus (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis), Cordyline fruticosa, copperleaf, or beefsteak, plant (Acalypha amentacea), bougainvillea (Bougainvillea spp.), poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcherrima), gardenia (Gardenia spp.), and the hedge panaxes (Polyscias spp.) (Thaman 1984e).
The final major area of activity has been the testing and establishment of trees for land reclamation, such as the project to rehabilitate low-lying areas at Sopu to the west of the capital of Nuku'alofa on Tongatapu. Reclamation work at Sopu began in the 1960s, with the planting of Casuarina equisetifolia to stabilize the area, and has continued to the present with extensive plantings of Lumnitzera littorea, Rhizophora mangle, Bruguiera gymnorhiza, Xylocarpus granatum, and other selected species. As recently as 1980, 6 acres of Lumnitzera littorea, 4 acres of Terminalia catappa, and 3 acres of Queensland kauri (Agathis robusta) were planted. The vegetation has reportedly been well-established, with the operation becoming more maintenance than reclamation.
Grazing, usually of cattle, with commercial tree cropping and silviculture consists mainly of the widespread practice of grazing cattle under coconuts or commercial timber species, and the limited grazing of cattle under Leucaena leucocephala or other fuel-wood or multipurpose species.
Livestock under coconuts
The grazing of cattle (primarily beef, but also dairy cattle) under coconuts (in some cases with pasture improvement) is by far the most widespread practice. It has been encouraged throughout the Islands since colonial times, particularly on large coconut estates. In addition to providing meat and dairy products, cattle are seen as effective weed control and fertilization agents, thus facilitating plantation management and the collection of fallen nuts.
Although primarily promoted on large, often foreign or state controlled estates or plantations, some governments, such as those in the Solomon Islands, Tonga, and Niue, have encouraged smallholder grazing of cattle under coconuts and other trees. In the case of Tonga, smallholder agriculturalists have been encouraged to fence limited portions of their 3.3 ha bush allotments to graze cattle, and sometimes horses, under coconuts and other tree crops and protected trees, or, alternatively, to tether animals to trees and graze on a rotational basis.
The practice has been particularly important in Vanuatu (both before and after independence in 1980) and New Caledonia, where beef cattle production is a major activity. Beef cattle production became so important in Vanuatu, prior to independence, that some plantations were turned into cattle properties. The importance of cattle grew in the 1950s, when steeply rising labour costs made planters increasingly dependent on cattle to keep their plantations clean. At one period in the 1950s, herds became larger than the plantations could support, especially during dry spells, and by the end of the decade, town butcheries had opened in both Port Vila and Luganville, the two main towns. By the end of the 1960s, copra production had become no more than a sideline on a number of plantations (Brookfield with Hart 1971, 164165).
In Fiji, in 1973, 10.5 per cent of the local beef requirements were supplied by the 9.9 per cent of the cattle population grazed under coconuts (MAF 1973; Manner 1983). This is particularly significant given the large proportion of range-fed cattle raised on extensive large-scale developments in the dry zones of Fiji. Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and New Caledonia in Melanesia, and Western Samoa and French Polynesia have also actively encouraged cattle under coconuts with trials having been conducted on optimum stocking rates and pasture improvement. Much of the Western Samoa Trust Estates (WSTEC) Mulifanua Copra Plantation, reportedly one of the largest copra plantations in the world (Carter 1984), is undergrazed by cattle.
The potential for the formal promotion of large-scale grazing of cattle under coconuts is greatest on the larger islands of Melanesia and Polynesia. On smaller islands, such as those in Tonga and the Cook Islands, where high population densities and land scarcity make more extensive agrosilvipastoral developments less relevant, small-scale rotational undergrazing of tethered animals is more appropriate. In Nine, where population density is low because of emigration to New Zealand, there have been problems of overgrazing and lack of fodder during times of drought- for example, during the severe drought of 1977-1978, when hay had to be imported from New Zealand.
Richardson (1983, 59) cautions that grazing under coconuts can create problems of soil compaction and, especially in the case of free grazing, preclude intercropping, which should take precedence in areas with limited land resources. As shown by studies in Papua New Guinea and elsewhere, smallholder beef cattle production can have harmful impacts on subsistence cropping (Grossman 1981). Where cash cropping or subsistence production is feasible, Richardson (1983, 59) argues that intercropping should take precedence over grazing under coconuts.
Cattle under timber species
The grazing of cattle under commercial timber species has been actively promoted in Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and Fiji. In Papua New Guinea, reforestation projects in both the highlands and lowlands offer opportunities for beef production, and cattle have been actively promoted to control weeds and reduce fire danger by consuming the fuel. Pinus caribaea planting has also been encouraged in order to provide shade for cattle in open grasslands (Watt 1980, 308). The introduction of pasture legumes into timber plantations and surrounding areas has also been actively encouraged, and the development of pastures, followed by grazing, has been more or less standard practice in a number of forest plantations in Papua New Guinea, where klinki and hoop pine (Araucaria spp.), Pinus caribaea, and Eucalyptus spp. are grown. Government forest plantations are made available to local Braziers who establish adequate fencing and pastures and follow acceptable range management and stocking practices (Howcroft 1974; 1983).
In the Solomon Islands, where there is a "Cattle Under Trees" (CUT) project, cattle have been grazed under Eucalyptus deglupta in forest plantations established by the government in logged forest (Macfarlane and Whiteman 1983; Schirmer 1983, 101; Watt 1980, 308) and in Vanuatu under both "Local Supply Plantations" and "Industrial Supply Plantations" of Cordia alliodora, as well as under Pinus caribaea on Aneityum, Erromango, Pentecost, and Santo (Jacovelli and Neil 1984, 8). Grazing under pines in Vanuatu is seen as a means of reducing the significant fire threat in plantations (Neil 1986a).
It is in Fiji that the practice has probably been tried most exten sively, owing to research undertaken by the Fiji Pine Commission (FPC), a statutory body with the objective of facilitating and developing "an industry based on the growing, harvesting, preserving and marketing of pine and other species of trees grown in Fiji" (CPO 1980, 141). The FPC is responsible for managing over 45,000 ha of Pinus caribaea out of an envisioned gross estate of 80,000 ha on the highly degraded talasiga (sunburnt) soils of the drier leeward grasslands of the two largest islands of Fiji. The relatively infertile and eroded areas are vegetated with a grassland sub-climax of presumed anthropogenic origin, including species such as Pennisetum polystachyon, Pteridium esculentum, Gleichenia liners, Psidium guajava, Dodonaea viscose, and Casuarina equisetifolia. On moister slopes, Miscanthus floridulus forms almost impenetrable thickets. These grasslands are subject to frequent and unauthorized burning.
The FPC undertook research into cattle grazing for two reasons: to examine the effects of cattle grazing on reducing fuel in high fire-risk zones; and to test the use of cattle as a site-preparation tool for clearing the land of Miscanthus floridulus, which proved difficult to eradicate by more conventional means such as slashing and burning (Drysdale 1982). Research has yielded variable results. Vincent (1971) concluded that grazing of cattle under 5- and 6-year-old pine plantations in poor soils had a detrimental effect on the incremental growth of pines, whereas grazing trials in the Nausori Highlands to determine the effect on fire hazard reduction resulted in a reduction in fuel from 2,500 kg per hectare to 800 kg per hectare, an average cattle weight gain of 0.24 kg per day, and no pasture deterioration despite heavy stocking rates (Gregor 1972). At Nawaicoba, Partridge (1977) reported weight gains twice this, when trees were planted at 2 m x 3 m spacing, with two rows in every five missing. In variable spacing trials, Bell (1981) found slight bark damage to trees less than one year old because of trampling, when the trees were spaced 3 m apart within rows and 2.5, 3, 3.5, and 4 m apart between rows, the cattle being introduced into the plantation when the pines were 54 cm high.
In 1982, the FPC reviewed various research projects on cattle under pines and concluded that given "the high overhead and general costs of FPC operations, commercial cattle grazing of unimproved pasture under pines, is an unlikely prospect" (Drysdale 1982, 4). Although fuel loadings were considerably reduced, the cost of using cattle for fuel reduction was "considered unacceptably high compared with alternatives such as burning" (Drysdale 1982, 3). In contrast, the use of cattle as a site-preparation tool where Miscanthus predominates was termed an "outstanding success" (Drysdale 1982, 8) because other methods of clearing the giant grass gave incomplete results, were impractical, or cost too much.
Because of the high cost of fencing, the long-term and extensive grazing of cattle under pines has been found to be an uneconomic proposition for the Fiji Pine Commission, although some 480 cattle are allowed to graze under pines free of charge at Drasa and Tavaka-bo, and some cattle owners unofficially graze their cattle in Fiji Pine Commission forests. Native landowners are also allowed to graze cattle under their own pine plantings, subject to certain restrictions. But cattle owners also are unlikely to find fencing a profitable venture. Open-range grazing with night-time penning may be a possibility. In addition, the economics of cattle grazing on improved pastures under trees in Fiji still needs to be ascertained.
Other silvipastoral activities
Trees such as Leucaena leucocephala are used as fodder in Tonga and Papua New Guinea, where they are browsed by cattle as a dietary supplement (Watt 1980, 308). There is perhaps some scope for the grazing of other animals such as pigs, goats, and chickens on improved legume pastures or fallows under coconuts, commercial timber species, or other trees (Quartermain 1980; Richardson 1983).
In the Pacific, as elsewhere, interest in agroforestry has recently grown rapidly among scientists, land-use experts, conservationists, and the development professionals of national governments and international agencies. As already noted, systems of commercial production that would now be classified as agroforestry were initiated early in the Pacific's colonial past, particularly in the form of multistorey arrangements of coconut palms with other crops or with cattle. With regard to agroforestry systems in the subsistence sphere, this book has sought to demonstrate their prevalence and antiquity in the Pacific Islands. As Yen (1980b, 91) comprehensively expressed it in his discussion of "Pacific Production Systems," there is nothing new about multi-storey cropping even though it has often been suggested to smallholders as an innovative technique they might adopt.
In fact native systems have always involved such techniques in village gardens with descending storeys of palms, trees, productive vines, shrubs, herbaceous root crops, and vegetable plants and ornamentals. Similarly, in swiddens, mixed species and variety plantings are themselves multi-storey. In this case such plantings also take on a successional aspect, for following the root crops, some cultigens such as banana and longer-term plants such as breadfruit and other fruit and nut trees, industrial shrubs, and vines, prolong the production of these gardens.
Geographers and anthropologists who have studied these sorts of indigenous systems find ironic some of the attempts made to introduce institutional agroforestry into the Pacific context. On the other hand, in a time of deforestation and agrodeforestation, it is apt to encourage both of the approaches to agroforestry described in chapter 1- the institutional approach, which generally seeks to introduce commodity-focused systems devised on the basis of modern forms of analysis, and the cultural-ecological approach, which is concerned more with long-standing indigenous systems, empirically devised and deeply embedded in the cultural landscape. Whether or not the two approaches can be usefully meshed remains open to question, although some forms of "progressing with the past" do seem possible (Clarke 1978).
When attention is turned to the future of institutional agroforestry in the Pacific, it can be clearly forecast that if individual smallholders are to benefit over the long term from the introduction of an unfamiliar institutionalized agroforestry system, they will need to receive an ongoing package of inputs and information, which suggests the need for some sort of extension service. Unfortunately, it is acknowledged that extension work in many Pacific countries is generally poor, and extension services often have only secondary ranking within ministries or departments (Hau'ofa et al. 1980, 188-189). How to remedy this deficiency raises several complex but pervasive issues, which have been dealt with at length in a large literature and which can only be superficially treated here.
With regard to the initial introduction of a new agroforestry system, it is easy - given the current popularity of agroforestry in the development world to find funding for workshops and projects, but these by their nature lack continuity, and they are often administered by staff unfamiliar with local agroforestry traditions. The Pacific is littered with projects advanced in support of all sorts of good causes their collapsed remnants remain, like the military paraphernalia rust ing on beaches after World War II. One way to incorporate continuity into projects and to move beyond reliance on inadequate extension services is to form a centralized management system for smallholders (sometimes referred to as a plantation mode of management). Such a system has been successful in several instances, notably the efficient smallholder production of sugar so important in Fiji's economy and also in tobacco production in that same country (Eaton 1988a). Some other attempts have been less successful. The pros and cons of the approach have been cogently summed up by Hardaker et al. (1984a; 1984b) and Ward (1984).
Aside from problems common to any project-based introduction, a specific constraint to the full realization of the potential of agroforestry by institutional means relates to the disciplinary compart-mentalization that characterizes institutions concerned with land use, whereby - as the Director of ICRAF commented - "agriculture and forestry normally fall under different ministries or, if they are under the same ministry, under separate departments,' (Lundgren 1987, 44). Writing specifically of the forestry sector in the South Pacific, Watt (1980, 302-303) noted that "the separation of agricultural and forestry extension services encourages the impression that agriculture and forestry are mutually exclusive alternatives rather than complementary land uses." Following on from and related to this sectoral compartmentalization is each institution's imperative to maximize the individual component that is the focus of that institution. In contrast, as has often been observed:
The subsistence land user's strategy and aims are to use his labour and land resources to optimize, with minimum risk, the production of various products and services required to satisfy all his basic needs. The fundamental inadequacy of conventional-discipline-oriented institutions lies in the failure to acknowledge and understand these basic facts, strategies and aims, and in the inability to adapt to them. The aims, infrastructure, rationale and philosophy of these institutions, as well as the training of their experts, are geared to the maximization of individual components, be they food crops, cash crops, animals or trees. There is little understanding that the land user needs to share out his resources for the production of other commodities or services (Lundgren 1987, 46).
When maximization is aimed at commercial products, as it most frequently is in the Pacific, a set of sometimes contradictory processes comes into play. For example, attempts to produce cash crops while continuing to meet subsistence needs may bring agricultural involution if land is limited, or it may result in an extension of cropping onto marginal sloping lands as cash crops or cattle take over better lands. A specialization in commercial products may not be accompanied by any concomitant increase in labour availability or extension advice (often restricted to larger producers) on how to increase subsistence production (Ward 1986; Yen 1980b).
Even the Fiji-German Forestry Project, which commenced in the mid1980s, appears mainly focused toward facilitating export cash cropping, although its terms of reference suggest a broader approach that includes "providing ecologically sound advisory assistance in the fields of forestry and agroforestry in line with the social, cultural and economic requirements of target groups" (Tuyll 1988, 3). Consultants to the Fiji-German Forestry Project have also made holistic and wide-ranging recommendations, but the Project's current activities, as described earlier in this chapter, are concentrated on improving the production of ginger as a cash crop by introducing exotic trees to prevent erosion and replace artificial fertilizer.
This accomplishment is not to be decried, but the approach, distinguished by its introduction of and experimentation with exotic trees alley-cropped with a cash crop, does little to preserve existing agroforestry systems or to maintain a balance between commercial agroforestry activities and activities that could protect the existing subsistence base. One consultant recommended to the Project that "agroforestry and forestry extension should not attempt to remain with or return to pure forms of subsistence economy but focus on including profitable cash crops at low risks" (von Maydell 1987, 35). This recommendation does indicate an appreciation of the need to minimize risk, but both it and all the other consultants' recommendations to the Project fail to support strongly the maintenance of a viable subsistence base. Another consultant, who had been selected to identify suitable sites for demonstration plots for the Project, was asked to comment on the idea of putting greater emphasis on the subsistence aspects of agroforestry and of analysing existing local agroforestry systems as demonstration plots into which selected improvements could be introduced. He responded that it was quite unrealistic to expect either the Fiji Government or the German funding agency to support such an emphasis in place of an emphasis on using agroforestry as a way to improve monocultural cash cropping.
In summary, export crops, timber trees, and grazing under coconuts have been the continuing focus of almost all official agroforestry activities for the past century. Regardless of whether it has been the colonial or post-colonial agricultural and forestry departments or, re cently, international aid agencies, the focus has been almost exclusively on monocultural, often large-scale production for export or, in the case of timber and fuel-wood production, for import substitution. Even the intercrops are usually cash crops for export or local sale. Consequently, most indigenous wild species and the wide range of traditional cultivars have received little official promotion and have been the focus of only limited research. Few technical experts or development entrepreneurs know enough about traditional mixed agricultural systems and their component plants to be willing or able to promote their expansion or maintenance. It is not only projects intended to develop commercial agriculture and forestry that may displace or degrade traditional agroforestry systems; modern institutional agroforestry projects may themselves play the same role.
Agencies and educational institutions promoting agroforestry
However, there are also movements in support of traditional systems. The growing popularization and recognition worldwide of the value of the "wisdom of the elders" (Knudtson and Suzuki 1992) may motivate increased institutional attention to indigenous polycultural systems of agroforestry in the Pacific. This section provides information on several examples of such attention and on the institutions involved; mention has been made earlier of some of these, but they will be referred to here briefly again to provide a coherent single account.
All the major universities within the Pacific region (University of Guam, both of Papua New Guinea's universities, the University of the South Pacific in Fiji and its School of Agriculture in Western Samoa, University of Hawaii, and the developing francophone institutions in New Caledonia and Tahiti) support staff with interests in traditional matters, including agriculture, agroforestry, and the management of soil and vegetation. Rather than attempt a full listing of course offerings relevant to agroforestry to at least some degree, we note here only that, on the basis of current information at hand, the courses most directly focused on agroforestry are found within the Geography Department at the University of the South Pacific in Suva, Fiji, and the Department of Agronomy and Soil Science at the University of Hawaii in Honolulu. To the best of our knowledge, the University of Hawaii is distinguished by being the only university in the region to have a named Professor of Agroforestry, who is located in the Department of Agronomy and Soil Science. The Col lege of Micronesia in Pohnpei also has staff with active and direct interests in indigenous agroforestry.
Agroforestry promotion by the Fiji-German Forestry Project, a bilateral agency, has been described in the previous section. A different approach is followed by the South Pacific Forestry Development Programme, which is a multilateral 5-year project funded by UNDP, executed by FAO, and now based in Suva, Fiji. The Programme is concerned with forests and trees in 15 countries, so far particularly with forests in the larger countries, but atoll countries are making enquiries about coconuts and other multi-purpose trees. The role of the Programme is to stimulate activities and provide technical advice, not to operate activities itself. For instance, it facilitated the import of seeds of superior rattan from Malaysia for planting in Pacific forests in order to increase their non-timber production capability. Aside from technical advice, the Programme acts as a focal point for information about forests and trees and publishes the quarterly South Pacific Forestry Newsletter. It is also trying to organize the documentation of local knowledge on indigenous agroforestry, with studies planned or under way in Pohnpei, Fiji, Kiribati, Tuvalu, Tonga, and other island countries.
The Programme has worked cooperatively with the international NGO The Foundation of the Peoples of the South Pacific (FSP) on a project intended to develop sustainable forestry in local areas while slowing down or stopping rapid conversion of forests by large-scale industrial logging. This objective is based in part on selling small mobile sawmills to rural entrepreneurs and community groups so that they may develop small-scale but profitable and locally utilitarian logging, carried out in ways that avoid major environmental damage and that maintain the essential structure of the forest for traditional uses and ecological services.
A US Government project based in Hawaii is carrying out work related to several aspects of agroforestry in Hawaii, American Micronesia, and American Samoa. Called Agricultural Development in the American Pacific (ADAP), the project has provided agroforestry educational materials to all the public (land grant) colleges and universities in the American-affiliated Pacific. In association with the US Department of Agriculture and the US Forest Service, ADAP is also developing training programmes in agroforestry.
The Environment and Policy Institute of the East-West Center in Hawaii maintained a strong programme of research, seminars, and publication on agroforestry for several years during the 1980s (e.g., Djogo 1992; Nair 1984). Although agroforestry is no longer a principal focus of its work, the Institute remains a repository of a large volume of published and unpublished material on the topic.
Mentioned at the beginning of this chapter was the report (Clements 1988) of a technical meeting on agroforestry in tropical islands held at the Institute for Research, Extension and Training in Agriculture (IRETA), which is part of the University of the South Pacific's School of Agriculture in Western Samoa. IRETA is also involved in research projects to improve or strengthen atoll agroforestry in Kiribati.
In the Melanesian countries, with their comparatively larger natural forests, forest-resource inventories are under way or planned, generally as a cooperative, aid-funded project between the local Forestry Department and overseas technical personnel. The inventories are intended to provide the information base necessary for effective land-use planning and management, but now, unlike some past forest assessments, the inventory process includes collection of data on watershed vulnerability and on the indigenous ethnobotanical value of forest plants, as in the forest-resource inventory now being completed by the Vanuatu Forestry Department with technical assistance from the Queensland (Australia) Forest Service and the Division of Tropical Crops and Pastures of the (Australian) Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO).
Finally, mention should be made of the work of ORSTOM, the French organization that promotes French scientific research in the third world, mainly in the tropics. With centres in the Pacific in Nouméa and Tahiti, ORSTOM has sponsored work not only related to many aspects of modern development but also to traditional cultural-ecological matters, for example, with specific relevance to agroforestry, the work on the cultivars of kava (Piper methysticum) in Vanuatu (Lebot and Cabalion 1986).
Contents - Previous - Next

PLAGUE ON OUR SHORES
City at War
THE GREAT CHINATOWN FIREOn New Year's Eve one hundred years ago, the first of a number of controlled fires were set in Chinatown as a way of defending Honolulu from bubonic plague, known in history as Black Death. Next to the Pearl Harbor attack, the outbreak of plague was the greatest public-safety disaster in Hawaiian history. The government was determined to do anything to save the city -- even burn it to the ground. Last week we began a four-part series by describing the discovery of plague in Honolulu and the quarantine system set up to contain it. Today's installment chronicles the attitudes that inspired the controlled burning that preceded the Great Chinatown Fire. The series concludes tomorrow.
PART I | II | III | IV | EpilogueBy Burl Burlingame
IT may have been simple bad luck, or it may have have been a white-dominated business conspiracy, or more likely it fell between the two extremes, but the Chinese residents of teeming Chinatown felt unfairly targeted by health authorities when Black Death erupted in Honolulu at the cusp of the century.
Although thousands of Hawaiian and Japanese were uprooted as the Board of Health methodically began to burn out plague infestations in the quarantine zone, it was Chinese-owned businesses that absorbed the brunt of property damage.
Chinese immigration to the island kingdom climbed steadily until the political coup in 1893 that unseated Liliuokalani. By the mid 1890s, one in five residents of Hawaii was of Chinese descent, and they put down firm roots, establishing schools, newspapers, cemeteries, temples and clan societies. Unlike some other groups of immigrants, however, the Chinese did not assimilate into Hawaiian culture, preferring instead to form a separate society.
This sense of separation was expressed in the Honolulu district known as "Chinatown" where small businesses operated by Chinese ex-plantation workers began to flourish in the 1860s. It is roughly the area bordered by Nuuanu, Beretania and King streets. The area was chockablock with Chinese restaurants, Chinese groceries, Chinese dry-goods shops and other small Chinese industries.
In 1886, sparks from a restaurant ignited an enormous fire that leveled most of the district. Excited by the urban clean slate, the Hawaiian government declared new structures had to follow sanitary constraints, were to be made of stone or brick, and considered widening and consolidating the streets. The Advertiser declared they had turned "a national disaster into an ultimate blessing."
It didn't happen. In the 14 years following the fire, Chinatown landowners allowed ramshackle, quickly constructed boomtown wooden buildings to blossom in the area, looming over the narrow dirt streets and overwhelmingly primitive sanitation facilities. The lessons of the 1886 fire were largely ignored.
In 1898, concerned about the swelling tide of Chinese immigration, the Republic of Hawaii evoked the restrictions of the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 even though Hawaii was not yet a territory of the United States.
More than 7,000 lived in Chinatown's 50 acres at the turn of the century, in an era when no building rose above two stories. Many were Japanese immigrants, jammed in structures controlled by Chinese landlords, who in turn paid Hawaiian and haole landowners.
And Chinatown had become the center of another kind of Asian-controlled business as well. The census taken in December 1899 revealed the area was brimming with organized prostitution, a niche business that provided economic entre for new immigrants. In 1900, 84 percent of known prostitutes in Honolulu were Japanese, and nearly 100 percent of the pimps were Japanese.
Despite the filthy squalor of living conditions, and the disdain with which Chinatown was viewed by the rest of Honolulu, it was an economic engine, pumping money into the pockets of landowners like Bishop Estate. At a time when a plantation worker made about $18 a month, Japanese prostitutes were making hundreds of dollars .
Although maintaining the status quo was lucrative, the overcrowded living conditions in Chinatown, coupled with a complete lack of urban planning for the area, created a neighborhood that ran with rats and insects, that had sewage and garbage lying unattended in the streets. Other residents of Honolulu turned up their noses at Chinatown, both literally and figuratively, while the residents of Chinatown had little choice but to stay where they were. The Advertiser called the district a "pestilential slum."
When the city finally started to build a sewer line through Chinatown in 1899, workers discovered they were digging through compacted layers of fermenting garbage. The intense odor caused diggers to slow to a near-halt.
With the onset of Black Death, a hastily organized troupe of health inspectors went on field trips into Chinatown as if it were a foreign country, and returned horrified. The district, full to bursting with shanty buildings, boarding houses, livestock corrals and chicken coops, reeking outdoor toilets and backyard cesspools, was swarming with rats, maggots, flies, lice and cockroaches. The only solution, it was argued, was a repeat of the cleansing fire of 1886, but this time applied in scientific manner, coupled with military discipline.
The military model was much admired at the time, following the triumph of American forces over the Spanish, and the new conflict involving Great Britain and the Boers was closely followed in Honolulu newspapers. Virtually all contemporary coverage of Honolulu's plague outbreak refers to the "campaign" against the bacillus as "war." And indeed it was -- a fight to the death.
It was in this atmosphere of indignant public opinion that the notion of burning Chinatown for the public good began to take root. What was missing was a legal excuse. An argument on Smith street provided it. A National Guard soldier stabbed a Japanese civilian in the thigh with his bayonet, and fallout from the incident forced the police and the military to determine their jurisdictions.
As Pvt. Hunt explained it, the Japanese attempted to run the blockade; others claimed Hunt had been prodding the man along. The slight wound triggered a reorganization of civil authority, with far-ranging consequences.
At the bottom line was the question of whether Hunt was legally responsible for his actions, whether civil or martial law reigned. After questioning witnesses, police officials decided martial law had not been declared, and the military was called out to assist the police in carrying out civil statutes. In this scenario, both soldiers and police had authority to use force to enforce the quarantine, but that did not give soldiers permission to commit assaults within the quarantine zone.
When this opinion was presented to the National Guard's Maj. Ziegler, however, the commander decided the military, once called to active duty, cannot be interfered with by civil authorities. The military's authority over the quarantine, and over the Honolulu police, was absolute.
Within hours, all Honolulu police were withdrawn from the quarantine zone, and all questions of authority routed to the National Guard. Although martial law had not been officially declared, soldiers were allowed to proceed as if it had. This made it easier to ignore the rules of civil law during the medical emergency that gripped Honolulu. The Board of Health, civilians appointed by President Sanford Dole, lame-duck head of a temporary republic, had absolute power over questions of life and death.
Chinese residents trapped by the city quarantine feared they were being singled out both in life and after death. Chinese immigrants believed if they died overseas, their bones must be returned to China. The Board of Health's solution to plague deaths -- quick cremation -- left no remains for shipping. Horrified Chinese began to hide their ill friends and relatives from authorities. This practice not only exacerbated contagion, but likely obscured the true numbers of plague victims.
A large delegation of Chinese merchants and Chinese consul Yang Wei Pin and Vice Consul Goo Kim met with Henry Cooper, president of the Board of Health, who insisted any decisions regarding cremation would be made by the board. The Chinese claimed the board was discriminating in favor of Japanese, and Cooper responded no Japanese have been diagnosed with plague, and the body of a white teenager had also been hurridly cremated. Cooper suggested they collect the ashes in urns for shipment back to China.
As Honolulu became a city at war, the battle lines of bureaucracy were being drawn. As the Evening Bulletin editorialized, lacking a clear chain of command while details of the new government were being hammered out, President Dole had the authority to appropriate funds to battle the plague. "Let there be no delay," the paper insisted. "This is a time for action, prompt energetic action. The people are prepared to support the vigorous measures which money will forward and which must be set on foot if the battle against black plague is to be short, sharp and decisive."
Burning was the apparent immediate answer. A committee of businessmen was formed to find warehouse space for goods removed from Chinatown stores that were being burned down, and during the first three weeks of January, 1900, buildings were torched nearly every day.
A photographer hired by the government recorded pictures of each building, and then it was set alight. Honolulu firemen bookended the flames with streams of water; soldiers and police kept crowds in line and watched for looters.
The newspapers kept track with maps and marveled at the "military" precision of the assault on Black Death. Lists of the dead were daily updated like box scores; by late January, dozens had passed away. The new crematorium on Quarantine Island blazed day and night.
Then five plague deaths within a couple of days occurred near the corner of Nuuanu and Beretania. Clearly, this was a hot spot for pestilence and the government decided to burn it out on the morning of Jan. 20. Four fire engines and every fireman in Honolulu were on the scene, but about an hour into the controlled burning, the wind scattered embers across neighboring rooftops. The wooden roof of Kaumakapili Church with its twin spires, the tallest building in the area, erupted into flame beyond the hoses of firemen.
Helpless, they watched flaming embers, carried on a sudden wind, fly unchecked onto the wooden buildings of Chinatown.
Click for online
calendars and events.

- published: 12 Feb 2012
- views: 396745
- author: musicisprettyneat
pretty great blocked in germany. irony Artist/Band: Kraftwerk Album: The Man-Machine Year: 1978 Genre: "Synthpop"/Electronic Wikipedia article: http://en.wik...
Man-Machine may refer to:
|This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the same title.
If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.
A machine is a tool consisting of one or more parts that is constructed to achieve a particular goal. Machines are powered devices, usually mechanically, chemically, thermally or electrically powered, and are frequently motorized. Historically, a device required moving parts to classify as a machine; however, the advent of electronics technology has led to the development of devices without moving parts that are considered machines.
The word "machine" is derived from the Latin word machina, which in turn derives from the Doric Greek μαχανά (machana), Ionic Greek μηχανή (mechane) "contrivance, machine, engine" and that from μῆχος (mechos), "means, expedient, remedy". The meaning of machine is traced by the Oxford English Dictionary to an independently functioning structure and by Merriam-Webster Dictionary to something that has been constructed. This includes human design into the meaning of machine.
A simple machine is a device that simply transforms the direction or magnitude of a force, but a large number of more complex machines exist. Examples include vehicles, electronic systems, molecular machines, computers, television and radio.
|This section requires expansion.|
Perhaps the first example of a human made device designed to manage power is the hand axe, made by chipping flint to form a wedge. A wedge is a simple machine that transforms lateral force and movement of the tool into a transverse splitting force and movement of the workpiece.
The idea of a "simple machine" originated with the Greek philosopher Archimedes around the 3rd century BC, who studied the "Archimedean" simple machines: lever, pulley, and screw. He discovered the principle of mechanical advantage in the lever. Later Greek philosophers defined the classic five simple machines (excluding the inclined plane) and were able to roughly calculate their mechanical advantage. Heron of Alexandria (ca. 10–75 AD) in his work Mechanics lists five mechanisms that can "set a load in motion"; lever, windlass, pulley, wedge, and screw, and describes their fabrication and uses. However the Greeks' understanding was limited to the statics of simple machines; the balance of forces, and did not include dynamics; the tradeoff between force and distance, or the concept of work.
During the Renaissance the dynamics of the Mechanical Powers, as the simple machines were called, began to be studied from the standpoint of how much useful work they could perform, leading eventually to the new concept of mechanical work. In 1586 Flemish engineer Simon Stevin derived the mechanical advantage of the inclined plane, and it was included with the other simple machines. The complete dynamic theory of simple machines was worked out by Italian scientist Galileo Galilei in 1600 in Le Meccaniche ("On Mechanics"). He was the first to understand that simple machines do not create energy, only transform it.
The classic rules of sliding friction in machines were discovered by Leonardo Da Vinci (1452–1519), but remained unpublished in his notebooks. They were rediscovered by Guillaume Amontons (1699) and were further developed by Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (1785).
|Simple machines||Inclined plane, Wheel and axle, Lever, Pulley, Wedge, Screw|
|Mechanical components||Axle, Bearings, Belts, Bucket, Fastener, Gear, Key, Link chains, Rack and pinion, Roller chains, Rope, Seals, Spring, Wheel|
|Clock||Atomic clock, Chronometer, Pendulum clock, Quartz clock|
|Compressors and Pumps||Archimedes' screw, Eductor-jet pump, Hydraulic ram, Pump, Trompe, Vacuum pump|
|Heat engines||External combustion engines||Steam engine, Stirling engine|
|Internal combustion engines||Reciprocating engine, Gas turbine|
|Heat pumps||Absorption refrigerator, Thermoelectric refrigerator, Regenerative cooling|
|Linkages||Pantograph, Cam, Peaucellier-Lipkin|
|Turbine||Gas turbine, Jet engine, Steam turbine, Water turbine, Wind generator, Windmill|
|Aerofoil||Sail, Wing, Rudder, Flap, Propeller|
|Electronic devices||Vacuum tube, Transistor, Diode, Resistor, Capacitor, Inductor, Memristor, Semiconductor, Computer|
|Robots||Actuator, Servo, Servomechanism, Stepper motor, Computer|
|Miscellaneous||Vending machine, Wind tunnel, Check weighing machines, Riveting machines|
The idea that a machine can be broken down into simple movable elements led Archimedes to define the lever, pulley and screw as simple machines. By the time of the Renaissance this list increased to include the wheel and axle, wedge and inclined plane.
An engine or motor is a machine designed to convert energy into useful mechanical motion. Heat engines, including internal combustion engines and external combustion engines (such as steam engines) burn a fuel to create heat which is then used to create motion. Electric motors convert electrical energy into mechanical motion, pneumatic motors use compressed air and others, such as wind-up toys use elastic energy. In biological systems, molecular motors like myosins in muscles use chemical energy to create motion.
An electrical machine is the generic name for a device that converts mechanical energy to electrical energy, converts electrical energy to mechanical energy, or changes alternating current from one voltage level to a different voltage level.
Electronics is the branch of physics, engineering and technology dealing with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies. The nonlinear behaviour of active components and their ability to control electron flows makes amplification of weak signals possible and is usually applied to information and signal processing. Similarly, the ability of electronic devices to act as switches makes digital information processing possible. Interconnection technologies such as circuit boards, electronics packaging technology, and other varied forms of communication infrastructure complete circuit functionality and transform the mixed components into a working system.
Charles Babbage designed various machines to tabulate logarithms and other functions in 1837. His Difference engine is the first mechanical calculator. This machine is considered to be the forerunner of the modern computer though none of them were built in his lifetime.
Study of the molecules and proteins that are the basis of biological functions has led to the concept of a molecular machine. For example, current models of the operation of the kinesin molecule that transports vesicles inside the cell as well as the myocin molecule that operates against actin to cause muscle contraction; these molecules control movement in response to chemical stimuli.
Researchers in nano-technology are working to construct molecules that perform movement in response to a specific stimulus. In contrast to molecules such as kinesin and myosin, these nano-machines or molecular machines are constructions like traditional machines that are designed to perform in a task.
Machines are assembled from standardized types of components. These elements consist of mechanisms that control movement in various ways such as gear trains, transistor switches, belt or chain drives, linkages, cam and follower systems, brakes and clutches, and structural components such as frame members and fasteners.
Modern machines include sensors, actuators and computer controllers. The shape, texture and color of covers provide a styling and operational interface between the mechanical components of a machine and its users.
Assemblies within a machine that control movement are often called "mechanisms."  Mechanisms are generally classified as gears and gear trains, cam and follower mechanisms, and linkages, though there are other special mechanisms such as clamping linkages, indexing mechanisms and friction devices such as brakes and clutches.
Controllers combine sensors, logic, and actuators to maintain the performance of components of a machine. Perhaps the best known is the flyball governor for a steam engine. Examples of these devices range from a thermostat that as temperature rises opens a valve to cooling water to speed controllers such the cruise control system in an automobile. The programmable logic controller replaced relays and specialized control mechanisms with a programmable computer. Servomotors that accurately position a shaft in response to an electrical command are the actuators that make robotic systems possible.
Design plays an important role in all three of the major phases of a product lifecycle:
The Industrial Revolution was a period from 1750 to 1850 where changes in agriculture, manufacturing, mining, transportation, and technology had a profound effect on the social, economic and cultural conditions of the times. It began in the United Kingdom, then subsequently spread throughout Western Europe, North America, Japan, and eventually the rest of the world.
Starting in the later part of the 18th century, there began a transition in parts of Great Britain's previously manual labour and draft-animal–based economy towards machine-based manufacturing. It started with the mechanisation of the textile industries, the development of iron-making techniques and the increased use of refined coal.
Mechanization or mechanisation (BE) is providing human operators with machinery that assists them with the muscular requirements of work or displaces muscular work. In some fields, mechanization includes the use of hand tools. In modern usage, such as in engineering or economics, mechanization implies machinery more complex than hand tools and would not include simple devices such as an un-geared horse or donkey mill. Devices that cause speed changes or changes to or from reciprocating to rotary motion, using means such as gears, pulleys or sheaves and belts, shafts, cams and cranks, usually are considered machines. After electrification, when most small machinery was no longer hand powered, mechanization was synonymous with motorized machines.
Automation is the use of control systems and information technologies to reduce the need for human work in the production of goods and services. In the scope of industrialization, automation is a step beyond mechanization. Whereas mechanization provides human operators with machinery to assist them with the muscular requirements of work, automation greatly decreases the need for human sensory and mental requirements as well. Automation plays an increasingly important role in the world economy and in daily experience.
An automaton (plural: automata or automatons) is a self-operating machine. The word is sometimes used to describe a robot, more specifically an autonomous robot. An alternative spelling, now obsolete, is automation.
|Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Machines|
The World News (WN) Network, has created this privacy statement in order to demonstrate our firm commitment to user privacy. The following discloses our information gathering and dissemination practices for wn.com, as well as e-mail newsletters.
We do not collect personally identifiable information about you, except when you provide it to us. For example, if you submit an inquiry to us or sign up for our newsletter, you may be asked to provide certain information such as your contact details (name, e-mail address, mailing address, etc.).
We may retain other companies and individuals to perform functions on our behalf. Such third parties may be provided with access to personally identifiable information needed to perform their functions, but may not use such information for any other purpose.
In addition, we may disclose any information, including personally identifiable information, we deem necessary, in our sole discretion, to comply with any applicable law, regulation, legal proceeding or governmental request.
We do not want you to receive unwanted e-mail from us. We try to make it easy to opt-out of any service you have asked to receive. If you sign-up to our e-mail newsletters we do not sell, exchange or give your e-mail address to a third party.
E-mail addresses are collected via the wn.com web site. Users have to physically opt-in to receive the wn.com newsletter and a verification e-mail is sent. wn.com is clearly and conspicuously named at the point ofcollection.
If you no longer wish to receive our newsletter and promotional communications, you may opt-out of receiving them by following the instructions included in each newsletter or communication or by e-mailing us at michaelw(at)wn.com
The security of your personal information is important to us. We follow generally accepted industry standards to protect the personal information submitted to us, both during registration and once we receive it. No method of transmission over the Internet, or method of electronic storage, is 100 percent secure, however. Therefore, though we strive to use commercially acceptable means to protect your personal information, we cannot guarantee its absolute security.
If we decide to change our e-mail practices, we will post those changes to this privacy statement, the homepage, and other places we think appropriate so that you are aware of what information we collect, how we use it, and under what circumstances, if any, we disclose it.
If we make material changes to our e-mail practices, we will notify you here, by e-mail, and by means of a notice on our home page.
The advertising banners and other forms of advertising appearing on this Web site are sometimes delivered to you, on our behalf, by a third party. In the course of serving advertisements to this site, the third party may place or recognize a unique cookie on your browser. For more information on cookies, you can visit www.cookiecentral.com.
As we continue to develop our business, we might sell certain aspects of our entities or assets. In such transactions, user information, including personally identifiable information, generally is one of the transferred business assets, and by submitting your personal information on Wn.com you agree that your data may be transferred to such parties in these circumstances.

By Dr. Mercola
Junk food is contributing to skyrocketing rates of diabetes, high blood pressure, and even strokes -- and not just among adults.
Food and beverage companies spend $2 billion a year promoting unhealthy foods to kids, and while ultimately it's the parents' responsibility to feed their children healthy foods, junk food ads make this much more difficult than it should be.
A new campaign, We're Not Buying It, is now underway to help expose deceptive marketing to children, debunk industry claims, and highlight the latest research, in the hopes of ending this assault on today's youth, and I'll explain how you can get involved, too, below.
Does Your Child Recognize the "Golden Arches"?
Most toddlers recognize the sign of McDonald's "golden arches" long before they are speaking in full sentences.
Because they are often raised on French fries, fast-food hamburgers and orange soda, or if "raised" is a bit of a stretch, are taught that French fries, chicken fingers and soda is an acceptable meal. Have you noticed that even in "regular" restaurants the kids' menu options are almost always entirely junk food like pizza, macaroni and cheese or fried chicken strips?
Of course kids will probably prefer these foods if that's what they're offered; these foods are manufactured to taste good, and most kids aren't going to opt for a spear of broccoli over a French fry -- until they're old enough to understand the implications of the choice, and assuming you have taught them about the importance of eating healthy foods along the way.
In many ways society is set up against you on this one. As The Interagency Working Group on Foods Marketed to Children (IWG) reports:
- The fast-food industry spends more than $5 million every day marketing unhealthy foods to children.
- Kids watch an average of over 10 food-related ads every day (nearly 4,000/year).
- Nearly all (98 percent) of food advertisements viewed by children are for products that are high in fat, sugar or sodium. Most (79 percent) are low in fiber.
So even under the best circumstances, your kids will probably be exposed to the latest "cool" kid foods, and this is what marketers are banking on. Then, when you go to the grocery store, your child will have a meltdown if you don't give in and buy the cereal with their favorite cartoon character on the box, or the cookies with brightly colored chips. If you're a parent, it's certainly easier to just give in, but it's imperative to be strong as shaping your child's eating habits starts very early on …
Your Child's Taste Preferences are Created by Age 3
Research shows when parents fed their preschool-aged children junk foods high in sugar, salt and unhealthy fats, it had a lasting impact on their taste preferences. All of the children tested showed preferences for junk foods, and all (even those who were just 3 years old!) were also able to recognize some soda, fast food and junk food brands.
The researchers concluded what you probably already suspect: kids who were exposed to junk food, soda and fast food, via advertising and also because their parents fed them these foods, learned to recognize and prefer these foods over healthier choices. This does have an impact on their health, as nutrients from quality foods are critical in helping your child reach his or her fullest potential!
One study from British researchers revealed that kids who ate a predominantly processed food diet at age 3 had lower IQ scores at age 8.5. For each measured increase in processed foods, participants had a 1.67-point decrease in IQ.
As you might suspect, the opposite also held true, with those eating healthier diets experiencing higher IQ levels. For each measured increase in dietary score, which meant the child was eating more fruits and vegetables for instance, there was a 1.2-point increase in IQ.
The reality is, the best time to shape your kids' eating habits is while they're still young. This means starting from birth with breast milk and then transitioning to solid foods that have valuable nutrients, like egg yolk, avocado and sweet potatoes. (You can easily cross any form of grain-based infant cereal off of this list.)
From there, ideally you will feed your child healthy foods that your family is also eating -- grass-fed meats, organic veggies, vegetable juice, raw dairy and nuts, and so on. These are the foods your child will thrive on, and it's important they learn what real, healthy food is right from the get-go. This way, when they become tweens and teenagers, they may eat junk food here and there at a friend's house, but they will return to real food as the foundation of their diet -- and that habit will continue on with them for a lifetime.
This is What Happens When You Let Marketers Dictate Your Kid's Diet …
The state of most kids' diets in the United States is not easy to swallow. As IWG reported:
- Nearly 40% of children's diets come from added sugars and unhealthy fats.
- Only 21% of youth age 6-19 eat the recommended five or more servings of fruits and vegetables each day
This is a veritable recipe for disease, and is a primary reason why today's kids are arguably less healthy than many prior generations. Obesity, type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure -- these are diseases that once appeared only in middle-age and beyond, but are now impacting children. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that by 2050, one in three U.S. adults will have diabetes -- one of them could be your child if you do not take steps to cancel out the messages junk-food marketers are sending and instead teach them healthy eating habits.
Make no mistake, the advertisers are doing all they can to lure your child in.
In fact, last year the food and beverage industry spent more than $40 billion, yes billion, lobbying congress against regulations that would decrease the marketing of unhealthy foods to kids. You can do a lot of persuading with $40 billion, which may explain why food manufacturers are allowed to get away with so much -- like putting pictures of fruit all over product packaging when the product actually contains no fruit.
A 2011 study by the Prevention Institute even found that 84 percent of food packages that contain symbols specifically intended to help people choose healthier foods did not meet even basic nutritional standards! In fact, 57 percent of these "Better-for-You" children's foods were high in sugar, 95 percent contained added sugar, and 21 percent contained artificial colors. So you need to be very wary when buying any processed foods for your kids, even the "healthy" ones, as they will most certainly contain large amounts of fructose with very little to offer in the way of healthy nutrition.
Help Fight Back Against Junk-Food Marketers and Stand Up for Kids' Health
The Prevention Institute's "We're Not Buying It" campaign is petitioning President Obama to put voluntary, science-based nutrition guidelines into place for companies that market foods to kids. You can sign this petition now, but I urge you to go a step further and stop supporting the companies that are marketing junk foods to your children today.
Ideally, you and your family will want to vote with your pocketbook and avoid as much processed food as possible and use unprocessed raw, organic and/or locally grown foods as much as possible. Your children should be eating the same wholesome foods you are -- they don't need bright-blue juice or deep-fried "nuggets" any more than you do.
If you and your kids are absolutely hooked on fast food and other processed foods, you're going to need some help and most likely some support from friends and family if you want to kick the junk-food lifestyle. Besides surrounding yourself with supportive, like-minded people, you can also review my article "How to Wean Yourself Off Processed Foods in 7 Steps" or read the book I wrote on the subject, called Generation XL: Raising Healthy, Intelligent Kids in a High-Tech, Junk-Food World.
Finally, my nutrition plan offers a step-by-step guide to feed your family right, and I encourage you to read through it now. You need to first educate yourself about proper nutrition and the dangers of junk food and processed foods in order to change the food culture of your entire family. To give your child the best start at life, and help instill healthy habits that will last a lifetime, you must lead by example. Children will simply not know which foods are healthy unless you, as a parent, teach it to them first.

Atlas Faust, MD
Dark Matter and Dark Energy
These are two words you often hear thrown around and more often that not I come across people who don’t know precisely what they are or even that they are two quite different things. So here we go.
When you take a look at a galaxy you see a certain characteristic known as gravitational lensing where light is warped in a certain way by mass. From this you can deduce an estimate of the mass of the galaxy. However when we compare this to the mass we estimated based on the concentration, size and distribution of visible mass within the galaxy we find the two numbers to be at odds and not only this but the greatest curving of space time is found in the spaces between objects where nothing can be seen. The difference in masses is believed to be caused by the elusive dark matter, so called because it warps spacetime like regular matter but is completely invisible (hence the dark). All in all dark matter constitutes 23% of the mass-energy density of the universe and a worrying 83% of the total amount of matter. The universe is made chiefly of stuff you cannot see.
Dark energy is also the answer to a problem, behaving somewhat like the x value in an algebraic equation we’re forced to solve. The problem lays in the fact that the universe is continuing to expand at an ever increasing rate and we have no idea why. When you think about it it really doesn’t make any sense, you would expect the universe’s expansion to slow down or at least stay constant but unfortunately this isn’t the case. Thus we call this mysterious energy that is causing the increasing the rate at which the universe expands “dark energy”.
We really know so very little.

Australian Museum Marine Invertebrate Collections
The Marine Invertebrate collection contains specimens from all invertebrate groups except molluscs, insects and spiders.
Crustaceans are animals that have:
- a segmented body with a hardened shell
- seven or more pairs of appendages for feeding, moving and reproduction
- limbs which generally have two branches
- two pairs of antennae
- gills for breathing
Polychaetes are animals that typically have:
- a long, basically cylindrical body
- a body segmented both internally and externally
- a pair of leg-like appendages (not jointed) attached to every body segment
About the collection
The current focus of the collection is on polychaetes (segmented worms) and crustaceans (lobsters, crayfish, prawns, crabs, seed shrimps, barnacles, slaters and pill bugs) which reflects the research interests of the marine invertebrate staff.
The Marine Invertebrate collections contain registered specimens, microscope slides, Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) preparations and photographic images. They include various marine invertebrates, and all other invertebrates except molluscs, insects and spiders, including freshwater and terrestrial representatives. The specimens contained in the collections are predominantly from New South Wales, Australia and the Indo-Pacific
The type collection comprises more than 9000 type lots, including more than 2000 primary types (types are the original specimens on which the first description of a species is based).
In addition to the registered collections there are also additional unsorted and unidentified collections, categorised by various taxonomic levels.
Combined with the Australian Museum Research Library the section also houses one of the largest collections of books and journal reprints in Australia providing taxonomic information on many invertebrate groups. This resource is available for use by scientists, students and the public by appointment. The reprint collection is currently being entered onto a computerised bibliographic database.
Marine Invertebrate Collections - Overview of taxonomic groups held
Dr Stephen Keable , Collection Manager, Marine Invertebrates

It's hard to understand from our knowledge of Greek, Egyptian, and other early civilizations with written records how such a magnificent site could not have been discovered by the Spanish. Yet until its discovery in the 1911, Machu Picchu, "the lost city of the Incas," remained forgotten for 400 years.
Actually, Machu Picchu was not a city at all. It was probably built by Pachacuti Inca as a royal estate and religious retreat in 1460-70. Its location—on a remote secondary road in nearly impassable terrain high above the Urubamba River canyon cloud forest—almost ensured that it would have no administrative, commercial or military use. Any movement in that direction to or from Cusco and the Sacred valley upriver would have been by other Inca roads, either the high road near Salcantay or by the Lucumayo valley road. Travel was restricted on these roads except by Inca decree.
After Pachacuti Inca's death, Machu Picchu remained the property of his allus, or kinship group, who were responsible for maintenance, administration and continued building. As an extraordinary sacred site (location as well as buildings), it surely was visited by Topa Inca and the last great ruler, Huayna Capac, although each in turn built their own estates and palaces. But few outside the Inca's retainers would have known of its existence.
The Inca: "Information's Gotta Be Restricted"
Of course the compound would have required a steady supply of outside goods. Machu Picchu, like most Inca sites was undergoing constant construction and must of had a resident crew of builders as well as attendants, planters, and others. So in order to really understand how Machu Picchu remained a secret, it's necessary to understand how Inca culture constricted travel and information.
The Inca were a completely ordered an regimented society. Although great numbers of people were moved around for corporate state projects and resettlement, once at a location, they didn't move. The royal roads were reserved for official travel. The Incas were able to control their remarkable state system through a pyramidal hierarchy with information and direction flowing down through 10 overseers to 100, to 1000 and so on. We know from historical writing and the archaeological record that the Incas did not possess a written language, although, they must have used some symbols and perhaps diagrams. We also know that the Quipu (collection of colored strings and knots) was extensively used for accounting and record keeping. But Quipus need highly trained interpreters to read them, and the Spanish were unable to locate or interrogate even one of these specialists. The Inca also maintained a class or guild of verbal historians. But with the catastrophic collapse of Inca state structure following the arrival of the Spanish, these historians were scattered and forgotten.
But Machu Picchu was mostly forgotten even before the Spanish came. Small pox was the conquistadores' advance guard. Huayna Capac and an estimated 50 percent of the population died of small pox sometime around 1527. Inca government suffered, and after a period of turmoil, the empire fell into civil war over Inca secession. Machu Picchu was probably abandoned at this time—both because it was expensive to maintain and with most of the population dead from war or epidemic, it was hard to find the labor to keep it up.
Conquistadores: If It Ain't Gold, We Don't Care
The Pizarros arrived in Cusco in 1532. The first wave of Spanish were mostly illiterate, uneducated adventurers who had little interest in anything besides wealth and power. By the time scholars and administrators arrived, knowledge of Machu Picchu had been lost.
Manco Inca staged a country wide rebellion in 1536. After a failed siege of Cusco, Manco, along with remnants of the court, army and followers, abandoned his headquarters at Ollantaytambo. Fleeing back into the remote Vilcabamba beyond Machu Picchu, He burned and destroyed Inca settlements and sites accessible to the Spanish including Llatapata at the start of the trail to Machu Picchu from the Urubamba River.
But by that point it hardly mattered. The Machu Picchu trail and the site itself would have been long overgrown and the approach blocked by seasonal landslides that so hinder backcountry travel in Peru.
Beyond personal observations and many trips to Machu Picchu, I have borrowed heavily from the excellent work of John Hemming, John Rowe and Johan Reinhart. Their writings are a must for anyone attempting an understanding of the Inca and the centuries of cultural development that preceded them.
Lost City of the Incas: The Story of Machu Picchu and its Builders, Hiram Bingham, Atheneum, 1972.
The Incas and Their Ancestors, Michael Moseley, Thames and Hudson, 1992
The Conquest of Peru, William H. Prescott, New American Library, 1961. A CLASSIC.
The Conquest of the Incas, John Hemming, Hartcourt Brace 1970.
Machu Picchu, The Sacred Center, Johan Reinhard, Nuevas Imagenes, Lima. 1991.
Details mentioned in this article were accurate at the time of publication

An Inside Glimpse of Thomas Point Lighthouse Historytesttest
Great August 4 article on the Bay’s beacons and guardians for safety. The city of Annapolis holds title to the Thomas Point Light. When I was mayor, I was fortunate to sign the special papers for transfer from the federal government to the city with the Secretary of the Interior in a ceremony at City Dock.
Saving the lighthouse by the city was controversial with the Council, several opining it would cost us money. I visited Rose Island Light in Newport, Rhode Island, owned by that city. In 30 years, they had not spent any money. Management was under a non-profit that raised funds for its upkeep.
We used the same model. The city holds title to protect the lighthouse. A consortium of Bay lighthouse volunteers, including the Annapolis Maritime Museum, are the keepers of the light. I feel privileged to have been a part of this transaction and to have my name on the deed. Thought you would be interested in the rest of the story on Thomas Point Light, a real Bay icon.

Not Just for Kids
The Hunt for Falling Leaves...
Nature's Color on the Ground
by Mary Catherine Ball
Being a reporter, I am always looking for an adventure. Last week, I found one.
I left work to go on a simple journey, but it turned out to be much more.
First, I crossed a mud-ridden stream. Then, I came face to face with flying creatures, fighting to get near me. I even endured webmakers spinning my hair into a shiny maze.
Where did I go? Into the woods, of course. Why? I wanted to gather some fallen leaves.
My luck was good that day. I was able to spy lots of different kinds of leaves lying on the ground. Some were leaves I had never seen. Some were still green, while others were changing to their autumn colors.
Have you ever hunted for leaves? I wonder if you know the names of five of the trees that live in your neighborhood? I bet the answer is no.
Well, me neither. So I had five of the leaves analyzed. I had found the leaves from an oak, a beech, a sweet gum tree and more.
Now, I invite you to make this journey.
Narrow body with pointy edges
Narrow body with pointy edges
May grow berries
Good for sap & color
3 distinct leafs
May grow nuts
This is your task...
Travel to the deep, dark woods (in the daylight) to find these 5 leaves. Cut out the page and take it with you. Make sure you can match your discovery with mine. Happy leaf-hunting!
Stone Soup October 9 (11:30am)-Enjoy lunch and a show. After you eat peanut butter & jelly, watch Stone Soup, performed by the Lost Caravan. Lunch is at noon; show starts at 12:30. Chesapeake Music Hall, Off Rt. 50 approaching the Bay Bridge: 410/406-0306.
All Aboard October 9 & 10 (2pm)-Chug a chug to Zany Brainy for train fun. Listen to stories and sing railroad songs. Build your own trains. Ages 3+. Zany Brainy, Annap. Harb. Ctr.: 410/266-1447.
Tiny Tots Fall for Nature Tues. Oct 12 (10:30am-noon) Three- to five-year-olds (and their adult) hike into the woods to hear autumn stories, gather leaves and make a craft. Bring a bag lunch to enjoy w/apple cider @ King's Landing Park, Huntingtown. $3 rsvp: 800/735-2258.
Spooky Stories in the Woods Tues. Oct. 12 (10:30-noon)-Hike with a ranger to a clearing in the woods. Listen to autumn stories and drink warm apple cider. Gather leaves to make a craft. Bring a bag lunch. Kings Landing Park, Huntingtown: 410/535-5327.
Musical Minds Wed. Oct. 13 (4-4:45pm)-Music makes the world go round. So sing, listen to stories and play musical instruments. Ages 2-4. Chesapeake Children's Museum, Festival at Riva. $8.50; rsvp: 410/266-0677.
Nature Designs Deadline Oct. 15-Create your favorite nature scene out of clay or on paper to win prizes. Age categories are 3-5, 6-8 and 9-12 years. Place winners win nature books or statues. All art forms accepted. Take your masterpiece to Wild Bird Center, Annapolis Harbour Center: 410/573-0345.
Tiny Tots get in Touch with Mother Nature Sat. Oct 16 (10-10:30am)
Tiny tots (2-3 w/adult) learn nature by touch, feeling the many different
textures rough and soft in the world around us. @ Battle Creek Cypress Swamp,
Prince Frederick: 800/735-2258.
| Issue 40 |
Volume VII Number 40
October 7-13, 1999
New Bay Times
| Homepage |
| Back to Archives |

Here's a fine think-piece by Susan Cain that praises some introversion as indispensable for creativity. To some great extent, Socrates and Jesus were solitary men. And the wisdom they shared with us couldn't have been captured in group reports or multi-authored articles.
Not only that, we live in a society that discourages, in so many ways, thinking for ourselves. We defer so readily to public opinion, fashion, and what the experts say and the studies show. Most studies that show stuff have a lot more than one author. Most books that change our lives have only one, and we don't live in a time when many are being written.
Just about every good play or novel or painting, of course, has its source in the vision of a single artist.
We also see, of course, that in the disciplines that require deep thought and personal interpretation (such as philosophy—especially political philosophy—and history), articles almost only have one author. Technical and scientific reports usually have more authors than they do pages.
If we want learning to be personal, personal thought has to be encouraged and rewarded. And persons, of course, have to be held personally responsible for both what they've learned and the ways in which they have expressed their thoughts.
In a class dealing with "real books" (such as ones written by Plato or Kant or Jane Austen or Pascal or Simone Weil), I find that the best students get less than ten percent of what's really going on, and "what's gotten" differs dramatically from student to student. If they had to produce a multi-authored paper, the result would be flattened out to what they can explain to each other. It goes without saying the good students would be particularly shy about expressing their most unconventional thoughts to each other, especially ones that have to do with God, love, death, and such to the other group members. They would also be shy about being too enthusiastic or "erotic" about what they've read to others who just didn't work as hard or care as much as they did. (All this is why I can't stand "peer review" as even a stage in evaluating student papers.)
It also goes without saying that the natural result is for good students to have quite different views on the truth and significance of what they've read—in part, due to what else they've read and their personal experiences. How could they possibly write a conclusion based on some consensus that's more than a bunch of feel-good banalities?
Good students do, of course, learn from each other through conversation. Part of a great class is something like a Socratic dialogue—keeping in mind that the participant closest to Socrates (me) dominates the discussion in various ways. The community of learners doesn't mean that all the learners are equal in the ways relevant to actual learning.
In the end: The student paper should be a rather solitary, introverted effort, although not one so introverted that the author is not excited about the possibility that the truth can be shared in common. "Shared in common" in the Socratic sense is a long distance from groupthink or what's usually meant by collaborative learning.
Another problem with "group projects" as a learning tool is that our society already rewards being witty and fashionable and pleasing to others far too much. It also already rewards too much shirkers whose main talent is taking credit for the real work of others. Let sucking up be saved for the actual world of business. It's not a skill that should be rewarded by college credit.
Here's another problem: Collaborative learning is also often an excuse for professorial laziness. Why read twenty papers when you can read five (written by groups of four)? The group dynamic also means that the papers will only be so good or so bad, and that means that the professor won't be taxed by a product that is too "outside the box" of what's expected.
If you ever sign up for a class that's a mixture of PowerPoint presentations based on some textbook followed up by group projects and presentations, immediately drop it and ask for your money back.
The philosopher Rousseau was against taking the idea of dispersing wisdom to everyone characteristic of the Enlightenment too seriously because the real goal of that approach is the production of a vain and pseudo-sophisticated herd of seemingly meritocratic techno-elitists. The philosopher—or the genuinely Enlightened person—is always a law unto himself. He's almost always not characterized by the ambiguous virtue of working well with others.

Report Highlights Declining Health of Caribbean Corals
7 September 2012: A new International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) report highlights that average live coral cover on Caribbean reefs has declined to just 8% of the reef today, compared with more than 50% in the 1970s. The report stems from a workshop held by the Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network (GCRMN) at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in the Republic of Panama, from 29 April-5 May 2012.
According to the report, rates of decline on most reefs show no signs of slowing. However, many reefs in the Netherlands Antilles and Cayman Islands have 30% or more live coral cover. The causes of these regional differences in reef conditions are not well understood, beyond the role of human exploitation and disturbance.
Carl Gustaf Lundin, Director, IUCN Global Marine and Polar Programme, notes that the major causes of coral decline include overfishing, pollution, disease, and bleaching caused by rising temperatures resulting from the burning of fossil fuels.
IUCN has recommended local action to improve the health of corals, including limits on fishing through catch quotas, an extension of marine protected areas (MPAs), a halt to nutrient runoff from land, and a reduction on the global reliance on fossil fuels. [IUCN Press Release] [Publication: Tropical Americas Coral Reef Resilience Workshop: Executive Summary]

Wednesday, January 30, 2013
SUMMARY: This book discusses:
*Where to look for birds close to home--often-overlooked spots in cities and suburban neighborhoods that can be bird magnets
*How to get deeper by studying the birds around your home and participating in citizen science and conservation projects
*Green birding listing challenges and groups the green birder can get involved in
*Includes advice on how to adapt your equipment to a new style of birding and how to attract more birds to your home garden.
RECOMMENDATION: A brief but detailed overview on the subject.
2) Pagel, Mark. Wired For Culture: Origins of the Human Social Mind. 2013. W.W. Norton. Paperback: 416 pages. Price: $18.95 U.S.
SUMMARY: A unique trait of the human species is that our personalities, lifestyles, and worldviews are shaped by an accident of birth—namely, the culture into which we are born. It is our cultures and not our genes that determine which foods we eat, which languages we speak, which people we love and marry, and which people we kill in war. But how did our species develop a mind that is hardwired for culture—and why?
Evolutionary biologist Mark Pagel tracks this intriguing question through the last 80,000 years of human evolution, revealing how an innate propensity to contribute and conform to the culture of our birth not only enabled human survival and progress in the past but also continues to influence our behavior today. Shedding light on our species’ defining attributes—from art, morality, and altruism to self-interest, deception, and prejudice—Wired for Culture offers surprising new insights into what it means to be human.
RECOMMENDATION: For those with an interest in human social evolution.

Something astonishing is happening in China. An unfolding story that one Chinese friend told me, “could be a turning point in conservation and wild bird protection in China.”
On Sunday 11 November local people discovered many sick and dying ORIENTAL STORKS (Ciconia boyciana) at Beidagang Reservoir, Tianjin (just 30 mins from Beijing by train). These globally endangered birds - with a restricted range in East Asia – had been poisoned illegally by poachers using a chemical called carbofuran that, although banned in the EU, Canada and many other countries, is commonly available and used, legitimately, as a pesticide all over China.
The storks were possibly unintended victims of well-organised and, sadly, all-too common poaching activity intended to catch swans, ducks and geese for the restaurant trade.
Carbofuran is mixed with cereal, or given to fish in small man-made pools. Birds lose consciousness after eating the bait, are caught by hand and injected with an antidote. The victims are then shipped – usually alive – to restaurants, primarily in southern China. The demand for wild birds is high and they are sold as a delicacy, with many consumers, particularly in southern cities like Guangzhou and Shenzhen, believing that wild birds taste better than farmed produce, and they are prepared to pay a premium. A wild goose or swan can fetch several hundred Yuan (100 Yuan = 10 GBP). The business is highly profitable.
The scale of this activity in China, and the range of methods used by poachers to catch wild birds, are covered in an excellent, but sobering, article in the most recent issue of Goose Bulletin. The authors estimate that between 80,000 and 120,000 ducks, swans and geese are caught illegally in China for the restaurant trade every year.
So what makes the recent case involving Oriental Storks at Beidagang such a big deal?
The answer is the incredible public reaction, led by local people and driven by social media.
The events unfolding at Beidagang, although desperately sad, could have been much worse were it not for some dedicated and brave individuals. Local birders, together with volunteers, officials from the Forestry Administration, police and even firemen have been working together to help catch, treat and care for these birds. They have set up 24/7 patrols to deter the poachers. All of this has been transmitted on social media and the coverage has gone viral. The Chinese micro-blogging service, Weibo, has over 500 million users (on a par with the global membership on Twitter) and activists have been providing regular updates that have been ‘re-tweeted’ by a growing band of followers. As I write this post, the latest update has been ‘re-tweeted’ over 900 times to more than a million users in less than one hour.
This is leading the traditional print and visual media. Already, we are seeing articles relating to this poisoning incident in Chinese and English language media, both local and national.
All of this follows a recent outcry against the illegal trapping and hunting of wild birds in China, also led by social media. Three weeks ago a brave undercover journalist released a shocking video about hunters using spotlights to confuse migrants in Hunan Province before gunning them out of the sky. The Chinese public was outraged and Weibo was alive with condemnation of the hunters and also criticism of the authorities for being slow to act. Shortly after this major outcry, local birders discovered over 2km of illegal mist nets at Beidagang, the site of the current Oriental Stork tragedy. Local activists, many of whom are now on site trying to save the storks, led a ‘day of action’ involving over 60 volunteers, and even the Chinese army, to take down illegal mist nets in the reedbed. This was covered by local and national TV as well as print media. Due to these two events, the number of articles relating to illegal bird trapping and hunting nationwide has exploded.
The campaign to eradicate the illegal hunting of birds is gaining momentum. And the scale of the reaction by ordinary Chinese people all over the country has been overwhelming, demonstrating clearly that the vast majority of Chinese people care deeply about their wild birds. It will be very hard for the authorities to ignore.
None of this would be happening without the incredible dedication, passion and energy of a small number of volunteers at Beidagang. There are many people involved but a special mention must go to Xunqiang Mo (aka “Nemo”), a local student, and Jingsheng Ma, who have personally led the effort to cut down the illegal nets and are now leading the ongoing operation to save the Oriental Storks. They are heroes in every respect.
Here is a personal account from yesterday evening, provided by Zhu Lei, a Beijing-based birder monitoring the situation:
“There is heart-breaking news. 8 more dead storks been found today, which raise the total number up to 21 !
The ground team located 3 evidently man-made small water pools (around diameter of 1m, depth of 0.3m), one of them contained a big empty packing bag (900 g × 20 packets – although the scene is absolutely terrible, it does not necessarily mean the whole bag of poison has been used there) of pesticide. We suspect that the poachers have put the toxic chemical directly into the water in these pools or used the same methods as those 2 Jilin guys (filled the fish with toxic, then put into the pools) to poison the birds.
According to signs on the bag, the pesticide used in this massacre is nothing but Carbofuran. The bags were already taken by the police as potential evidence. Some tissue also been taken from the dead birds for further forensic tests. The cause of death will only be revealed as the test report is released (although everything points to it being poisoning with carbofuran).
The volunteer team (mostly from the local community and nearby Tianjin city) should be applauded for their hard work. Among them, a bicycle enthusiasts team is worthy of mention for they’ve taken the duty to patrol the dam which surrounds the wetland in daytime, and at least 3 of them have tried hard to wade into the muddy wetland searching for sick birds. Several local rich bird photographers (I think the guys who can afford the big Canon or Nikon big lenses and expensive cameras could be called ‘rich’) have provided financial support to cover spending such as other volunteers’ accommodation and food, etc.
People from government agencies also contributed to the action. Today, even a team of firemen was called to the spot, due to lack of proper equipment (e.g. waders, boats) to deal with the situation faced in the wetland. They just try to do what they can over there.
24h ground patrolling has been launched last night, and the patrol has been equipped with night-vision goggles donated by a businessman from Tianjin.
Tomorrow, the team will focus on locating more poisoned lure pools and will destroy them. A plan to provide safe food (mainly small fish) to the storks still at the wetland will be carried out tomorrow.
Special thanks to Nemo for his great devotion and efforts in saving those birds on-site, and kindly receiving my interview tonight. He is a real hero and deserves our highest respect.”
You can follow the latest developments with the Oriental Storks at Beidagang and the broader campaign to eradicate illegal mist-netting at this website. Already, many people have expressed their support for these brave and committed individuals and their comments are making a real difference to the volunteers. Knowing that there are people all over the world supporting their efforts is a real boon for them. If you haven’t already, please take a moment to comment to show your support. This could just be the decisive battle in the war against illegal trapping and hunting of wild birds in China.

Lady Liquor: The Racial Implications of the "Disease" Model of Alcoholism
Earlier in this series I wrote about the notion that the desire for intoxication may be universal, and how that connects with the “disease model” of addiction. The disease model, as far as I can tell, first gained traction as an idea in the 1930s with the formation of Alcoholics Anonymous. Groups similar to AA, such as the Washingtonian Movement and the Oxford fellowship (which AA cofounder Bill Wilson attended before forming his own voluntary fellowship) had existed prior to AA's formation, but AA took off in a way they never did, for a variety of reasons. Alcoholism wasn't recognized as a disease by medical and psychiatric associations until the 1950s – but the disease model is now pretty firmly entrenched in our understanding of chemical dependency.
Personally, I don't think it's an accident that AA was formed just a few years after Prohibition ended. Its formation represented a fundamental cultural shift – one that recognized prohibiting the sale of alcohol had not solved any of the problems that concerned Temperance leaders, including the way problem drinking affected families. It still prescribed total abstinence from alcohol, just not for the entire population. And while Temperance leaders placed more of the blame for problem drinking on alcohol itself – and the people who sold it – than on the drinkers, heavy drinking was still viewed as a moral failure rather than a medical problem. In the decades after the advent of AA, many cities' laws against public drunkenness were thrown out or softened, and instead of being thrown into drunk tanks, people found stumbling around or sleeping it off in public spaces were taken to detox and rehab facilities – a problematic policy shift in itself since people who aren't ready for rehab won't benefit from it but still, arguably, a change for the better. All of that resulted from a movement that has attempted to make addiction a morally neutral, medical issue and has argued for treating people with addiction issues with compassion rather than dismissive contempt.
But our understanding of addiction, through the disease model lens, has evolved in odd ways. (It occurs to me, for instance, that if 12-step recovery programs don't necessarily view addiction as a moral problem, they promote a faith-based – and therefore “moral,” in some sense – solution.) In the 1980s, researchers began investigating a potential link between addiction and genetics – and almost immediately started talking about whether genetics would explain why some races or nationalities had higher incidences of problem drinking than others.
Again, it was offered as a morally neutral alternative to existing stereotypes about weak-willed, shiftless or mean drunks, particularly those in certain minority groups (Native Americans, and to a much, much, lesser extent, Irish-Americans). Brown University epidemiologist Stephen Buka, in a paper discussing health disparities as they relate to substance abuse, notes that there is greater genetic variability within major racial groups than between them and that racial disparities in health status. Research on ethnicity and race as they relate to heavy drinking is intrinsically problematic, if not impossible to conduct, because these are plastic concepts that change with society; discussions about the ethnic connection to drinking invariably group all native Americans (on both continents) into one single ethnic category; in the same discussions, the Irish are presented as genetically distinct from all other European ethnicities.
The same way that evolutionary psychology (or at least, bad reporting on evolutionary research) often conveniently reinforces sexist stereotypes about the role of men and women in the 21st society, genetic explanations for alcoholism tend to reinforce preexisting stereotypes about certain ethnic groups and races – in the case of both Native Americans and (now fully assimilated, but still cheekily stereotyped) Irish-Americans, these are stereotypes that date back centuries before the discovery of DNA; stories about the purported “out-of-control” drinking habits of Native Americans date back to the first interactions between white explorers and natives, with the former presenting their own drinking norms as refined and in control. Socioogist and social worker Richard Thatcher, author of the 2004 book Fighting Firewater Fictions: Moving Beyond the Disease Model of Alcoholism, argues that both the disease model and the “firewater myth” not only cast Native American people in the most essentialist terms, but considers problem drinking from the social, cultural and economic realities with which many indigenous people cope – perpetuating a racist status quo and leading many young people to believe they will eventually, inevitably become alcoholics themselves. That becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy, particularly in cultures (Thatcher's work focuses on indigenous people in Canada) where no effort is made to address the other societal factors that lead to problem drinking.
People drink for a lot of reasons: to celebrate, to grieve, to relax and, I would argue, we sometimes drink, too much, too heavily, to bear the unbearable, including systematic racism (not just on the part of indigenous peoples, but other racial minorities as well). While removing moral judgment from that coping mechanism is a step in the right direction, treating alcoholism as a disease separate from the social and historic factors that brought it about in the first place gives societies license to continue not addressing those factors. It gives dominant groups a pass to perpetuate the racist status quo, rather than helping to improve the living conditions and economic prospects of Native people. Where alcohol dependence and ongoing marginalizing intersect is where the discourse—and the treatment—should be centered.
Previously: Race, marketing, and uneasy relationships
Comments11 comments have been made. Post a comment.
Have an idea for the blog? Click here to contact us!
www.petathome.eu (not verified)
suraj (not verified)
suraj (not verified)
sarahbcknr (not verified)
Anonymous (not verified)

Intellectual disability begins in childhood. People with intellectual disability have limits in their mental functioning seen in below-average intelligence (IQ) tests and in their ability to communicate, socialize, and take care of their everyday needs. The degree of disability can vary from person to person. It can be categorized as mild, moderate, severe, or profound.
Some causes of intellectual disability can be prevented with proper medical care. Children diagnosed with an intellectual disability are most successful when they get help early in life. If you suspect that your child may have an intellectual disability, contact your doctor.
Several hundred causes of intellectual disability have been discovered, but many are still unknown. The most common ones are:
Biomedical causes resulting from:
- Abnormal genes inherited from parents
- Errors when genes combine, such as Down syndrome and Fragile X syndrome
- Nutritional deficiencies
- Metabolic conditions, such as phenylketonuria (PKU), galactosemia , and congenital hypothyroidism
- Developmental brain abnormality, such as hydrocephalus and brain malformation
- Infections during pregnancy, such as:
- Behavioral issues during pregnancy, such as:
Problems at birth, such as:
- Premature delivery or low birth weight
- Baby doesn’t get enough oxygen during birth
- Baby is injured during birth
Factors during childhood, such as:
- Nutritional deficiencies
- Illnesses or infections that affect the brain, including meningitis , encephalitis , chickenpox , whooping cough , and measles
- Exposure to lead , mercury , and other toxins
- Head injury or near drowning
- Social factors, such as child stimulation and adult responsiveness
- Educational deficiencies
A child could be at higher risk for intellectual disability due to any of the causes listed above, or due to intellectual disability in other family members. If you are concerned that your child is at risk, tell your child's doctor.
Symptoms appear before a child reaches age 18. Symptoms vary depending on the degree of the intellectual disability. If you think your child has any of these symptoms, do not assume it is due to intellectual disability. These symptoms may be caused by other, less serious health conditions.
- Learning and developing more slowly than other children of the same age
- Difficulty communicating or socializing with others
- Lower than average scores on IQ tests
- Trouble learning in school
- Inability to do everyday things like getting dressed or using the bathroom without help
- Difficulty hearing, seeing, walking, or talking
- Inability to think logically
The following categories are often used to describe the level of intellectual disability:
- IQ 50-70
- Slower than normal in all areas
- No unusual physical signs
- Can learn practical skills
- Reading and math skills up to grades 3-6
- Can conform socially
- Can learn daily task skills
- Functions in society
- IQ 35-49
- Noticeable delays, particularly speech
- May have unusual physical signs
- Can learn simple communication
- Can learn elementary health and safety skills
- Can participate in simple activities and self-care
- Can perform supervised tasks
- Can travel alone to familiar places
- IQ 20-34
- Significant delays in some areas; may walk late
- Little or no communication skills, but some understanding of speech with some response
- Can be taught daily routines and repetitive activities
- May be trained in simple self-care
- Needs direction and supervision socially
- IQ <20
- Significant delays in all areas
- Congenital abnormalities present
- Needs close supervision
- Requires attendant care
- May respond to regular physical and social activity
- Not capable of self-care
If you suspect your child is not developing skills on time, tell the doctor as soon as possible. Your doctor will ask about your child’s symptoms and medical history. A physical exam will be done. Standardized tests may be given that measure:
- Intelligence—IQ tests measure a person’s ability to do things such as think abstractly, learn, and solve problems. A child may have intellectual disability if IQ test results are 70 or below.
Adaptive behavior—These are skills needed to function in everyday life, including:
- Conceptual skills like reading and writing
- Social skills like responsibility and self-esteem
- Practical skills like the ability to eat, use the bathroom, and get dressed
Children with intellectual disability have a higher risk for other disabilities such as hearing impairment , visual problems, seizures , attention deficit hyperactivity disorder , or orthopaedic conditions. Additional testing may be needed to check for other conditions.
Talk with your doctor about the best treatment plan for your child. Treatment is most helpful if it begins as early as possible. Treatment includes:
- Early intervention programming for infants and toddlers up to age three
- Family counseling
- Human development training, including emotional skills and hand-eye coordination
- Special education programs
- Life skills training, such as preparing food, bathing
- Job coaching
- Social opportunities
- Housing services
To help reduce your child’s chance of becoming intellectually disabled, take the following steps:
- During pregnancy:
- Have your newborn screened for conditions that may produce intellectual disability.
- Have your child properly immunized .
- Schedule regular visits to the pediatrician.
- Use child safety seats and bicycle helmets.
- Remove lead-based paint from your home.
- Keep poisonous household products out of reach .
- Aspirin is not recommended for children or teens with a current or recent viral infection. This is because of the risk of Reye's syndrome , which can cause neurological problems. Ask your doctor which medicines are safe for your child.
- Reviewer: Rimas Lukas, MD
- Review Date: 03/2013 -
- Update Date: 00/31/2013 -

Debt Ceiling to allow U.S. Debt to hit historic level in early 2013
While there have been and continue to be a significant number of hands wringing over the fiscal cliff , which takes effect on December 31, perhaps the REAL issue is coming very early in 2013: the U.S. Debt Ceiling.
The fiscal cliff is being discussed on every business report on television, radio, Internet blogs and print media. As you most likely know, fiscal cliff is the name given to the event associated with the simultaneous expiration of the Bush-era tax cuts, the increase in the payroll tax and the immediate reduction of federal government spending. For reference, here are links to APMEX’s special reports n the fiscal cliff.
Fiscal Cliff is but the Beginning
While the sudden and significant impact of multiple changes in the economy is surely creating anxiety and uncertainty in both the personal lives and business of Americans, this is likely only the beginning of issues as the United States begins to respond to the “new normal” following the Great Recession.
However, the next increase in the federal debt ceiling – the maximum amount the U.S. may borrow as set by Congress – will establish the maximum U.S. Federal Debt at about $18 trillion. While this is, of course, a huge level of debt and the largest debt of any country, the U.S. also has the world’s largest economy.
The question that each country must address is “How much debt can this country afford?” The answer depends on a number of factors and is often measured in the ratio of debt to Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the borrowing country. Historically, for the U.S., this ratio has generally been between 30 percent and 65 percent, from 1950 until the beginning of the Great Recession in 2008.
U.S. Debt is at Historically High and Dangerous Levels
When the next debt ceiling is set by Congress, most likely in early 2013, presuming borrowing to the ceiling and low GDP growth, the U.S. Debt to U.S. GDP ratio will most likely be about 120 percent, a level more than double the historical levels since 1950.
How does this compare to other countries? Below is a table of several key countries around the world. Also, here is a complete list of countries with Debt to GDP levels provided by the International Monetary Fund.
The History and the Current Status of the U.S. Debt Ceiling
During World War I in 1917, the U.S. Congress passed a law requiring Congressional approval on the aggregate debt outstanding of the United States. Prior to this, Congress was required to approve each and every debt offering. Since 1950, there have been 95 changes to the debt ceiling; since 2000 there have been 13 changes, or about one per year. You can read about the History of the U.S. Debt Ceiling or see a listing of all changes to the U.S. Debt Ceiling, use Table 7.3.
Since 2000, the increases in the U.S. Debt Ceiling have been larger than in previous years as the United States borrowed more to finance the 2000 dot-com bust, the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, and the Federal support of the Great Recession of 2007–2008.
The current status of the U.S. Public Debt and the Debt Limit is shown in the charts below. The U.S. Debt has increased by more than 15 percent since January 2011. The current U.S. Debt is very close to the U.S. Debt Ceiling of about $16.5 trillion and, accordingly, Congress will be required to take action very soon.
The U.S. Debt has increased $2.1 trillion, or about 15percent, in just two years since January 2011. Despite the large increase, the Federal Government has almost borrowed to the limit.
The U.S. Debt Ceiling must be raised in the very near future, most likely in a few months. As the chart below shows, at the end of October 2012, only about $172 billion remained available under the U.S. Debt Ceiling. In November 2011, federal borrowing increased by $119 billion, and if that were the borrowing rate for November 2012, almost all of the available U.S. Debt availability would be consumed.
Note: In an article in The Wall Street Journalon December 12, 2003, it was reported that the U.S. Treasury currently has only about $67 billion remaining in borrowing capacity.
The red line represents the total borrowing capacity of the United States that is above the current aggregate outstanding U.S. Debt. Since January 2012, U.S. borrowing has increased such that the remaining availability has declined each month , leaving the availability in November 2012 at just $172 billion. Here is the U.S. Treasury Monthly Statement of the Public Debt of the United States.
Gold and the U.S. Debt in 2012 and Beyond
With much debate on the fiscal cliff and future debate on the debt ceiling, the end result will be that the U.S. will most likely continue to be in a period of very high federal debt relative to the GDP. This relationship cannot be changed in a year and perhaps not even in five years.
The Europeans are ahead of the United States in addressing their debt to GDP issues with Greece, Portugal, Ireland and Italy. Spain will most likely become a problem as well. The solution in Europe has been the same as the solution in the U.S.: the Central Banks create more currency to keep the economy from falling even further.
A recent article in Barron’s, titled “Is Bad News Still Good News for Gold?” Randall Forsyth, the author, in the last paragraph says
As long as authorities try to do whatever it takes to hold the system of fiat currencies and indebted governments from flying apart, paper money will continue to lose value relative to the traditional store of value, gold.

I like projects. I really liked this project. The pipe insulation roller coaster project is one of the most enjoyable projects I've ever used in class.
It was my second year teaching physics. During the unit on energy, the book we were using frequently used roller coasters in their problems. We even had a little "roller coaster" to use with photo gates. I thought we could do better.
My original idea was to get some flexible Hot Wheels tracks and make some loop-de-loops and hills. Turns out a class set of Hot Wheels track is pretty expensive. On an unrelated yet serendipitous visit to my local big box hardware store, I ran across the perfect (and cheap!) substitute: Pipe Insulation!. For $1.30 or so you can get six feet of pipe insulation- which doubles nicely as a marble track1 when you split the pipe insulation into two equal halves. It's really easy to cut pipe insulation with a sharp pair of scissors. Just be sure you don't buy the "self-sealing" pipe insulation, which has glue pre-applied- it's more expensive and it'd turn into a sticky mess.
At first I planning to simply design a one-period long investigation using the pipe insulation (my original ideas morphed into the pre-activity for this project). As I started to think through the project more and more, I realized we could go way bigger. And thus, the pipe insulation roller coaster project was born.
Building the Coasters
In groups of three, students were given 24 feet of pipe insulation (4 pieces), a roll of duct tape2, and access to a large pile of cardboard boxes3. All groups had to adhere to a few standard requirements:
- Construction requirements
- The entire roller coaster must fit within a 1.0m x 2.0m rectangle4.
- There must be at least two inversions (loops, corkscrews, etc.).
- All 24 feet of pipe insulation must be used.
- The track must end 50 cm above the ground.
In addition to meeting the above requirements, students were required to utilize their understanding of the work-energy theorem, circular motion, and friction to do the following:
- Determine the average rolling friction, kinetic energy, and potential energy at 8 locations on their roller coaster.
- Determine the minimum velocities required for the marble to stay on the track at the top of all the inversions
- Determine the g-forces the marble experiences through the inversions and at least five additional corners, hills, or valleys.
- The g-forces must be kept at "safe" levels5.
- Rolling friction, kinetic energy, and potential energy
- The potential energy () is easy enough to find after measuring the height of the track and finding the mass of the marble. The kinetic energy is trickier and can be done by filming the marble and doing some analysis with Tracker, but since the speed of the marble is likely to be a little too fast for most cameras to pick up clearly, it's probably easier (and much faster) to simply measure the time it takes the marble travel a certain length of track. I describe how this can be done in a previous post, so check that out for more info. That post also includes how to calculated the coefficient of friction by finding how much work was done on the marble due to friction- so I'll keep things shorter here by not re-explaining that process.
- Pro-tip: Have students mark every 10 cm or so on their track before they start putting together their coasters (note the tape marks in this pic). Since d in in this case is the length of track the marble has rolled so far, it makes finding the value for d much easier than trying to measure a twisting, looping roller coaster track.
- This is also called the critical velocity. That's fitting. If you're riding a roller coaster it's pretty critical that you make it around each loop. Also, you might be in critical condition if you don't. While falling to our death would be exciting, it also limits the ability to ride roller coasters in the future (and I like roller coasters). Since we're primarily concerned with what is happening to the marble at the top of the loop, here's a diagram of the vertical forces on the marble at the very top of the loop:
So just normal force (the track pushing on the marble) and gravitational force (the earth pulling on the marble). Since these forces are both acting towards the center of the loop together they're equal to the radial force:
When the marble is just barely making it around the loop (at the critical velocity), the normal force goes to zero. That is, the track stops pushing on the marble for just an instant at the top of the loop. If the normal force stays zero for any longer than that it means the marble is in free fall, and that's just not safe. So:
Then when you substitute in masses and accelerations for the forces and do some rearranging:
There you go. All you need to know is the radius of the loop, and that's easy enough to measure. Of course, you'd want a little cushion above the critical velocity, especially because we're ignoring the friction that is constantly slowing down the marble as it makes its way down the track.
- An exciting roller coaster will make you weightless and in the next instant squish you into your seat. A really bad roller coaster squishes you until you pass out. This is awesomely known as G-LOC (G-force Induced Loss of Consciousness). With the proper training and gear, fighter pilots can make it to about 9g's before G-LOC. Mere mortals like myself usually experience G-LOC between 4 and 6g's.
As I mentioned, I set the limit for pipe insulation roller coasters at 30g's simply because it allowed more creative and exciting coaster designs. While this would kill most humans, it turns out marbles have a very high tolerance before reaching G-LOC.
Raise the stakes
Students become fiercely proud of their roller coasters. They'll name them. Brag about them. Drag their friends in during lunch to show them off. Seeing this, I had students show off their creations to any teachers, parents, or administrators that I was able to cajole into stopping by for the official testing of the coasters. I even made up a fun little rubric (.doc file) for any observers to fill out for each coaster. This introduces some level of competition into the project, which gives me pause- though from day one students generally start some friendly smack talk about how their coaster is akin to the Millenium Force while all other coasters are more like the Woodstock Express. The students love to show off their coasters, and it seems the people being shown enjoy the experience as well.
Assessment is massively important. However, this post is already long. The exciting conclusion of this post will feature the assessment piece in: Part 2: Pipe Insulation Roller Coaster Assessment.
The Pipe Insulation Roller Coaster Series
- Pipe Insulation Roller Coasters and Rolling Friction
- Pipe Insulation Roller Coasters
- Pipe Insulation Roller Coaster Assessment
- The first day we played with pipe insulation in class I had students use some marble-sized steel balls. Unfortunately because the steel balls are so much heavier and the pipe insulation is spongy and flexible, there was just too much friction. When we switched to marbles the next day everything worked like a charm. (back)
- Most groups typically use more than one roll of duct tape. My first couple years I bought the colored duct tape and gave each group a different color. That was a nice touch, but also a bit more expensive than using the standard silver. Whatever you decide, I highly recommend avoiding the cut-rate duct tape. The cheap stuff just didn't stick as well which caused students to waste a lot of time fixing places where the duct tape fell and in the end used a lot more duct tape. (back)
- I had an arrangement with our school's kitchen manager to set broken down boxes aside for me for a few weeks before we started the project. If that's not an option, I've also found if you talk to a manager of a local grocery store they're usually more than willing to donate boxes. (back)
- I made it a requirement for groups to start by building a cardboard rectangle with the maximum dimensions. This served two functions: (1) It made it easy for the groups to see what space they had to work with, and (2) it allows the roller coasters to be moved around a little by sliding them across the floor. (back)
- Originally I wanted students to keep g-forces below 10. Very quickly it became apparent that under 10g's was overly restrictive and I upped it to 30g's. That's not really safe for living creatures, but it would certainly make it more "exciting." (back)

Guest post by Henry B. Perry
Henry Perry, M.D., Ph.D., MPH, is a senior associate in the Department of International Health at Johns Hopkins University’s Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore, Md.
During the past half-century, there has been a growing recognition that community-based workers can make an important contribution to the health of communities, especially in resource-constrained settings. These workers are known by many names, but most commonly Community Health Workers (CHWs). With initial training of usually 6 weeks or less, they can effectively provide different types of services from community mobilization to health education to preventive screening to family planning education to identifying persons with symptoms of leprosy or tuberculosis to diagnosis and treatment of life-threatening childhood illness, and many more. These persons may work as volunteers or for modest incentives or salaries.
Based on early projects that utilized CHWs effectively in a number of developing countries, the seminal International Conference on Primary Health Care — sponsored by the World Health Organization and UNICEF in 1978 and attended by high-level representatives of almost every country in the world — recognized that in many settings where facilities and highly trained health workers are scarce, CHWs can become an important part of a primary health care system.
The Declaration of Alma Ata, adopted at the conference, called for basic health services — promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative — to be provided by “health workers, including physicians, nurses, midwives, auxiliaries and community workers [italics added] as applicable, as well as traditional practitioners as needed, suitably trained socially and technically to work as a health team and to respond to the expressed health needs of the community.” The Declaration also recognized the importance of providing health services “as close as possible to where people live and work.”
A rapidly growing number of studies demonstrate that CHWs make it possible to expand access and improve coverage of essential services, particularly in remote and poorly served populations, thereby improving equity. CHWs have been shown to play critical roles in interventions to
- reduce child mortality, including distribution of vitamin A capsules and other critical micronutrients
- promote water and sanitation education (hand washing, point-of-use water treatment and safe water storage, latrine construction and promotion of latrine use)
- distribute mosquito nets and assist communities in draining stagnant water to eliminate breeding grounds for mosquitoes
- diagnose and treat childhood pneumonia, diarrhea, malaria, newborn sepsis and severe malnutrition
- promote healthy behaviors such as appropriate breastfeeding (exclusive breastfeeding during the first six months of life and continued breastfeeding until at least one year of age)
- provide hygiene and cleanliness education
- ensure appropriate care of newborns
- promote and facilitate immunizations for mothers and children.
Many countries can benefit by scaling up integrated community case management of pneumonia, diarrhea, malaria and newborn sepsis and promotion of healthy behaviors that can save the lives of millions of children who are dying from preventable causes.
CHWs are one of the essential ingredients for making this possible — along with political commitment, professional leadership, long-term sustainable training, support and supervision from the health system and reliable logistical support of basic medicines and supplies. A strong commitment by the world community to these activities, which are some of the most cost-effective approaches to promoting global equity in health, is a moral imperative for today and tomorrow.
James Grant, the renowned executive director of UNICEF from 1980 to 1995 and champion of what is often referred to as the First Child Survival Revolution, repeatedly reminded us that “morality must march with capacity.”
We now know that CHWs can have the capacity to make a difference between life and death for millions of children. The moral imperative for the world community is to ensure that health systems and underserved communities support CHWs in attaining this capacity.
Berman, P. A., D. R. Gwatkin, et al. (1987). “Community-based health workers: head start or false start towards health for all?” Soc Sci Med 25(5): 443-459.
Haines, A., D. Sanders, et al. (2007). “Achieving child survival goals: potential contribution of community health workers.” Lancet 369(9579): 2121-2131.
Lassi, Z. S., B. A. Haider, et al. (2010). “Community-based intervention packages for reducing maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality and improving neonatal outcomes.” Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11: CD007754.
Newell, K. W., Ed. (1975). Health by the People. Geneva, Switzerland, World Health Organization.
Perry, H., P. Freeman, et al. (2009). How Effective Is Community-based Primary Health Care in Improving the Health of Children? Summary Findings and Report to the Expert Review Panel, American Public Health Association.
Sazawal, S. and R. E. Black (2003). “Effect of pneumonia case management on mortality in neonates, infants, and preschool children: a meta-analysis of community-based trials.” Lancet Infect Dis 3(9): 547-556.
World Health Organization and UNICEF (1978). Declaration of Alma-Ata: International Conference on Primary Health Care. International Conference on Primary Health Care. Alma-Ata, USSR.

The Garo community is one of the major tribes in Bangladesh. According to the history books, the Garo tribe entered Bangladesh in the first century. They were refugees from Mongolia and came to this region through Tibet.
The Garo have stayed in Bangladesh for thousands of years. Initially, they followed a religion called Sonatoni; during the British rule in this subcontinent they came to Christ. Today, nearly 100 percent of the Garo tribe practices Christianity, though a few still believe in Sonatoni.
Garos have their own language, Achick, which is completely different from the local language, Bengali. Achik has several accents/branches such as Habeng, Attong, etc.
The Garo tribe also has its own culture. Their dress, food habits and celebration styles can be easily distinguished from the Bengalis and other tribes.
The people from the Garo tribe have different features than the original inhabitants of Bangladesh (Bengali people). They are a little shorter and have fair skin. Their eyes and nose are similar to their ancestors from Mongolia.
Compared to the other tribal groups, the Garo tribe is little advanced in education and social activities. The first Garo church (Garo Baptist Convention) was established in 1910. Many missionaries and evangelists from Europe and North America worked among the Garo people over the decades.
Being a part of a developing country, the Garo community also suffers from poverty. Many Garo families are deprived of education.
Garos in the villages and in remote places suffer from lack of clean water and sanitation. There are many villages like Gobindopur and Nalchapra, which greatly need hospitals and medical facilities.
The people from the Garo community have to go to the local pharmacy for minor diseases or injuries. For major problems, they have to take the patient to the town, which is about 35 kilometers away.
The Garo have only one high school (sixth through 10th grade) with a capacity of only 300 children. This government school has only nine teachers. There are also two primary schools in those villages with limited capacity and facilities.
The houses of the Garo people are made of bamboo walls and straw or tin roofs. Some houses have mud walls with a roof of straw and plastic sheets. House are typically 7 feet wide and 14 feet long. The Garo build their own houses. Usually they have free spaces in front of their houses. They keep cows, chicken and ducks as pets.
Garo families usually have an average of two to three children.
Thirty percent of the Garo people have completed high school. However, the remaining 70 percent have not; the poor families can’t afford to send their children to school.
The government of Bangladesh has ensured that all children can attend primary school. But many children from the Garo community drop out after the primary level.
The educated people from the Garo community work in nongovernmental and other corporate organizations. The poorer Garo people earn their keep by working as day laborers, usually in the crop fields for nine or 10 hours daily.
Available transportation in Garo villages is cycle or rickshaw, especially for long distances. But since most peope can’t afford the rickshaw fare, they walk. Cycle-vans are used to carry goods.
In the Garo culture, both male and female have to work for the family. The interesting part is that the Garo ladies get ownership of the properties from the family, a tradition completely opposite of the Bengali people.
The Garo festivals are very colorful and full of music and dancing. Christmas and Easter are the two major religious festivals. Their biggest cultural festival is called Wangala.
Wangala is the festival when the Garo thank God for the new crops. It takes place just after the harvesting period. The Garo prepare pitha (homemade pies), sweets and other food to celebrate this occasion. At the celebration, Garo girls wear their traditional dress and sprinkle puffed rice and dry rice with their hands.
The traditional dress of the Garo ladies is called Dokbanda, a combination of a long skirt and blouse. The gents wear regular shirts, trousers and lungi (Bangladeshi skirt for men).
The favorite dishes of the Garo are pork, snails, eel and little tortoises. They use a special substance called Khari to make the food more tasteful. They prepare the Khari at home.
Compassion-assisted child development centers that serve the Garo people include: BD-401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411 and 412.

In the earliest times, the many gods of the Egyptians were unique children of One Great God, the Source of All Life. Among the many gods, none of them was considered to be the ultimate god. Each was a free-willed portion of the Great Oneness which composed the Most High God. Even in Genesis the plural form is used as the name of God, indicating that the One was composed of many, and the many contained the Universal, Omnipresent One.
John Van Auken
Source: Ancient Egyptian Mysticism and Its Relevance Today, Pages: 5

Using the Congressional Serial Set for Genealogical Research
By Jeffery Hartley
(This article appeared in the Spring 2009 issue of Prologue. It has been excerpted and reprinted here with the permission of the author.
The Historical Documents section in GenealogyBank includes over 243,000 reports from the US Serial Set and the American State Papers).
Click here to search the American State Papers and US Congressional Serial Set in GenealogyBank.com
Genealogists use whatever sources are available to them in pursuit of their family history: diaries, family Bibles, census records, passenger arrival records, and other federal records. One set of materials that is often overlooked, however, is the Congressional Serial Set.
This large multivolume resource contains various congressional reports and documents from the beginning of the federal government, and its coverage is wide and varied. Women, African Americans, Native Americans, students, soldiers and sailors, pensioners, landowners, and inventors are all represented in some fashion. While a beginning genealogist would not use the Serial Set to begin a family history, it nevertheless can serve as a valuable tool and resource for someone helping to flesh out an ancestors life, especially where it coincided with the interests of the U.S. federal government.
Since its inception, the U.S. government has gathered information, held hearings, compiled reports, and published those findings in literally millions of pages, the majority of which have been published by the Government Printing Office (GPO).
These publications include annual reports of the various executive branch agencies, congressional hearings and documents, registers of employees, and telephone directories. Their topics cover a wide range, from the Ku Klux Klan to child labor practices to immigration to western exploration.
In 1817, the Serial Set was begun with the intent of being the official, collective, definitive publication documenting the activities of the federal government. Following the destruction of the Capitol in 1814 by the British, Congress became interested in publishing their records to make them more accessible and less vulnerable to loss.
In the early Federal period, printing of congressional documents had been haphazard, and the Serial Set was an effort designed to rectify that situation. Although initially there were no regulations concerning what should be included, several laws and regulations were promulgated over the years. The contents, therefore, vary depending on the year in question.
In 1831, 14 years after the Serial Set was begun, the printers Gales & Seaton proposed that a compilation of the documents from the first Congresses be printed. The secretary of the Senate and the clerk of the House were to direct the selection of those documents, 6,278 of which were published in 38 volumes between 1832 and 1861. This collection was known as the American State Papers.
Because it was a retrospective effort, these 38 volumes were arranged chronologically within 10 subject areas: Foreign Relations, Indian Affairs, Finance, Commerce & Navigation, Military Affairs, Naval Affairs, Post Office, Public Lands, Claims, and Miscellaneous.
Although not technically a part of the Serial Set, the volumes were certainly related, and therefore the volumes were designated with a leading zero so that these volumes would be shelved properly, i.e. before the volumes of the Serial Set. (1)
The Congressional Serial Set itself includes six distinct series: House and Senate journals (until 1953), House and Senate reports, House and Senate documents, Senate treaty documents, Senate executive reports, and miscellaneous reports. The journals provide information about the daily activities of each chamber. The House and Senate reports relate to public and private legislation under consideration during each session.
Documents generally relate to other investigations or subjects that have come to the attention of Congress. Nominations for office and military promotion appear in the Senate Executive Reports. Miscellaneous reports are just thatwidely varied in subject matter and content. With the possible exception of the treaty documents, any of these can have some relevance for genealogists.
The documents and reports in the Serial Set are numbered sequentially within each Congress, no matter what their subject or origin. The documents were then collected into volumes, which were then given a sequential number within the Serial Set. The set currently stands at over 15,000 volumes, accounting for more than 325,000 individual documents and 11 million pages.
The Serial Set amounts to an incredible amount of documentation for the 19th century. Agency annual reports, reports on surveys and military expeditions, statistics and other investigations all appear and thoroughly document the activities of the federal government.
In 1907, however, the Public Printing and Binding Act provided guidelines for what should be included, resulting in many of these types of reports no longer being included as they were also issued separately by the individual agencies. The number of copies was also trimmed. With that stroke, the value of the Serial Set was lessened, but it nevertheless stands as a valuable genealogical resource for the 19th century.
So what is available for genealogists? The following examples are just some of the types of reports and information that are available.
The Serial Set contains much information concerning land claims. These claims relate to bounty for service to the government as well as to contested lands once under the jurisdiction of another nation.
In House Report 78 (21-2), there is a report entitled “Archibald Jackson.” This report, from the House Committee on Private Land Claims, in 1831, relates to Jackson’s claim for the land due to James Gammons. Gammons, a soldier in the 11th U.S. Infantry, died on February 19, 1813, “in service of the United States.” The act under which he enlisted provided for an extra three month’s pay and 160 acres of land to those who died while in service to the United States. However, Gammons was a slave, owned by Archibald Jackson, who apparently never overtly consented to the enlistment but allowed it to continue. That Gammons was eligible for the extra pay and bounty land was not in dispute, but the recipient of that bounty was. Jackson had already collected the back pay in 1823 and was petitioning for the land as well. The report provides a decision in favor of Jackson, as he was the legal representative of Gammons, and as such entitled to all of his property. (2)
Land as bounty was one issue, and another was claims for newly annexed land as the country spread west. In 1838, the House of Representatives published a report related to Senate Bill 89 concerning the lands acquired through the treaty with Spain in 1819 that ceded East and West Florida to the United States. Claims to land between the Mississippi and the Perdido Rivers, however, were not a part of that treaty and had been unresolved since the Louisiana Purchase, which had taken the Perdido River as one of its limits. The report provides a background on the claims as well as lists of the claimants, the names of original claimants, the date and nature of the claim, and the amount of the land involved. (3)
Other land claims are represented as well. In 1820, the Senate ordered a report to be printed from the General Land Office containing reports of the land commissioners at Jackson Court House. These lands are located in Louisiana and include information that would help a genealogist locate their ancestor in this area. Included in this report is a table entitled “A List of Actual Settlers, in the District East of Pearl River, in Louisiana, prior to the 3d March, 1819, who have no claims derived from either the French, British, or Spanish, Governments.” The information is varied, but a typical entry reads: No. 14, present claimant George B. Dameson, original claimant Mde. Neait Pacquet, originally settled 1779, located above White’s Point, Pascag. River, for about 6 years. (4)
Among the reports in the Serial Set for the 19th century are the annual reports to Congress from the various executive branch agencies. Congress had funded the activities of these organizations and required that each provide a report concerning their annual activities. Many of these are printed in the Serial Set, often twice: the same content with both a House and a Senate document number. Annual reports in the 19th century were very different from the public relations pieces that they tend to be today.
Besides providing information about the organization and its activities, many included research reports and other (almost academic) papers. In the annual reports of the Bureau of Ethnology, for instance, one can find dictionaries of Native American languages, reports on artifacts, and in one case, even a genealogy for the descendants of a chief. (5)
These reports can often serendipitously include information of interest to the family historian. For instance, the annual report of the solicitor of the Treasury would not necessarily be a place to expect to find family information. The 1844 report, however, does have some information that could be useful. For instance, pages 36 and 37 of this report contains a “tabular list of suits now pending in the courts of the United States, in which the government is a part and interested.”
Many on the opposite side of the case were individuals. An example is the case of Roswell Lee, late a lieutenant in the U.S. Army, against whom there has been a judgment for over $5,000 in 1838. Lee was sued in a court in Massachusetts and in 1844 still owed over $4,000. In a letter dated May 5, 1840, the district attorney informed the office (6)
that Mr. Lee is not now a resident of the district of Massachusetts, and that whether he ever returns is quite uncertain; that nothing, however, will be lost by his absence, as the United States have now a judgment against him, which probably will forever remain unsatisfied.
Another set of annual reports that appear in the Serial Set are those for the Patent Office. The annual reports of the commissioner of patents often include an index to the patents that were granted that year, arranged by subject and containing the names of the invention and the patentee and the patent number. The report included a further description of the patent, and often a diagram of it as well. Each year’s report also included an index by patentee.
Unfortunately, the numbers of patents granted in later years, as well as their complexity, led to more limited information being included in later reports. The 1910 report, for instance, simply contains an alphabetical list of inventions, with the entries listing the patentee, number, date, and where additional information can be found in the Official Patent Office Gazette. (7)
The Civil War gave rise to a number of medical enhancements and innovations in battlefield medicine, and the annual report for 1865, published in 1867, contains a reminder of that in the patent awarded to G. B. Jewett, of Salem, Massachusetts, for “Legs, artificial.” Patent 51,593 was granted December 19, 1865, and the description of the patent on page 990 provides information on the several improvements that Jewett had developed. The patent diagram on page 760 illustrated the text. (8)
This annual report relates to a report from May 1866, also published in the Serial Set that same session of Congress, entitled “Artificial Limbs Furnished to Soldiers.” This report, dated May 1866, came from the secretary of war in response to a congressional inquiry concerning artificial limbs furnished to soldiers at the government’s expense. Within its 128 pages are a short list of the manufacturers of these limbs, including several owned by members of the Jewett family in Salem, Massachusetts, New York, and Washington, D.C., as well as an alphabetical list of soldiers, detailing their rank, regiment and state, residence, limb, cost, date, and manufacturer. Constantine Elsner, a private in B Company of the 20th Massachusetts living in Boston, received a leg made by G. B. Jewett at a cost of $75 on April 8, 1865. 9 This may have been an older version of the one that Jewett would have patented later in the year, or it may have been an early model of that one. Either way, a researcher would have some idea not only of what Elsner’s military career was like, but also some sense of what elements of life for him would be like after the war.
Congress also was interested in the activities of organizations that were granted congressional charters. Many of the charters included the requirement that an annual report be supplied to Congress, and these were then ordered to be printed in the Serial Set.
One such organization is the Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR). As one would expect, the DAR annual reports contain a great deal of genealogical and family history information. The 18th annual report is no exception. Among other things, it includes, in appendix A, a list of the graves of almost 3,000 Revolutionary War soldiers. The list includes not just a name and location, but other narrative information as well:
Abston, John. Born Jan. 2, 1757; died 1856. Son of Joshua Abston, captain of Virginia militia; served two years in War of the American Revolution. Enlisted from Pittsylvania County, Va.; was in Capt. John Ellis’ company under Col. Washington. The evening before the battle of Kings Mountain, Col. Washington, who was in command of the starving Americans at this point, sent soldiers out to forage for food. At a late hour a steer was driven into camp, killed, and made into a stew. The almost famished soldiers ate the stew, without bread, and slept the sleep of the just. Much strengthened by their repast and rest, the next morning they made the gallant charge that won the battle of Kings Mountain, one of the decisive battles of the American Revolution. Washington found one of the steer’s horns and gave it to Abston, a personal friend, who carried it as a powder horn the rest of the war. (10)
Another organization whose annual reports appear is the Columbia Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, which later became Gallaudet University. These reports, found in the annual reports of the secretary of the interior, contain much of what one would expect: lists of faculty and students, enrollment statistics, and other narrative. While that information can help to provide information about one’s ancestor’s time there, there are other parts of the narrative that include information one would not expect to find.
For instance, the 10th annual report for 1867 has a section entitled “The Health of the Institution.” It concerns not the fiscal viability of the institution but rather the occurrences of illness and other calamities. One student from Maryland, John A. Unglebower, was seized with gastric fever and died: “He was a boy of exemplary character, whose early death is mourned by all who knew him.” Two other students drowned that year, and the circumstances of their deaths recounted, with the hope that “they were not unprepared to meet the sudden and unexpected summons.” (11) Both the faculty and the student body contributed their memorials to these two students in the report.
Other organizations represented in the Serial Set are the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts of America, Veterans of World War I of the United States, proceedings of the National Encampment, United Spanish War Veterans, the American Historical Association, and the National Convention of Disabled American Veterans.
Lists of Pensioners
The history of pensions provided by the federal government is beyond the scope of this article. However, the Serial Set is a source of information about who was on the rolls at various times. For instance, an 1818 letter from the secretary of war was published containing a list of the persons who had been added to the pension list since May 28, 1813. The list provides information on the likes of Susanna Coyle, certificate of pension no. 9, heiress of deceased soldier William Coyle, alias Coil, a private who received pay of four dollars per month. (12)
Sundry lists of pensions appeared in 1850, related to the regulation of Navy, privateer, and Navy hospital funds. The report included four lists: those placed in the invalid list who were injured while in the line of duty; those drawing pensions from wounds received while serving on private armed vessels; widows drawing pensions from their husbands who were engineers, firemen, and coal-heavers; and orphan children of officers, seamen, and marines pensioned under the act of August 11, 1848. (13)
One of the most widely consulted lists is that for 1883, “List of Pensioners on the Roll, January 1, 1883” (Senate Executive Document 84 [47-2]). This five-volume title, arranged by state and then county of residence, provides a list of each pensioner’s name, his post office, the monthly amount received, the date of the original allowance, the reason for the pension, and the certificate number.
An example is the case of Eli G. Biddle, who served in the 54th Massachusetts. Biddle can be found on page 439 of volume 5 of the “List,” and a researcher can learn several things without even having seen his pension file: his middle name is George, he was living in Boston in 1883, and he was receiving four dollars each month after having suffered a gunshot wound in the right shoulder. His pension certificate number is also provided 99,053 and with that one could easily order the appropriate records from the National Archives.
The Serial Set serves as a source of military registers and other lists of government personnel as well. Both Army and Navy registers appear after 1896. The Army registers for 1848–1860 and the Navy registers for 1848–1863 are transcripts of the lists that appeared the preceding January and include pay and allowances, with corrections to that earlier edition for deaths and resignations.
The Official Register, or “Blue Book,” a biannual register of the employees of the federal government, appears for 10 years, from 1883 to 1893. If one’s ancestors were employees at this time, their current location and position, place from which they were appointed, date of appointment, and annual compensation can be gleaned from this source.
The Serial Set often provides unexpected finds, and the area of registers is no exception. There is a great deal of material on the Civil War, from the 130 volumes of the Official Records of the War of the Rebellion to other investigations and the aforementioned registers and lists of pensions. There are not, however, large amounts of compiled unit histories.
One exception, however, is the report from the adjutant general of Arkansas. Shortly after the Civil War, the adjutant general offices of the various Union states prepared reports detailing the activities of the men from their states. The same was done in Arkansas, but the state legislature there, “under disloyal control,” declined to publish the report. Senator Henry Wilson of Massachusetts, chairman of the Senate Committee on Military Affairs, brought it to the committee in 1867, and it was ordered to be printed in the Serial Set so that the loyal activities of these 10,000 men would be recognized. (14) The report includes brief histories of each unit as well as a roster of the unit and rank, enlistment date, and other notes on each soldier.
Accessing Information in the Serial Set
The indexing for the Serial Set has long been troublesome to researchers. Various attempts have been made to provide subject access, with varying degrees of success. Many of the indexes in the volumes themselves are primarily title indexes to the reports from that Congress and session. The Checklist of United States Public Documents, 1789–1909, does provide information about what reports listed therein do appear in the Serial Set, but the researcher has to know the name of the issuing agency in order to access that information. The Document Index provides some subject indexing by Congress, and other efforts such as those by John Ames and Benjamin Poore can also be used, but none index the tables and contents of many of the reports that have been discussed in this article. (15)
The best comprehensive print index is the Congressional Information Service’s (CIS) U.S. Serial Set Index, produced in conjunction with their microfilming of the volumes through 1969 beginning in the mid-1970s. In this index, a two-volume subject index covers groups of Congresses, with a third volume providing an index to individual names for relief actions, as well as a complete numerical list in each report/document category. The index, however, does not index the contents of the documents. For instance, although the title given for the Archibald Jackson land claim includes James Gammons’s name, the latter does not appear in the index to private relief actions. In addition, users must often be creative in the terms applied in order to be sure that they have exhausted all possibilities. In the mid-1990s CIS released these indexes on CD-ROM, which makes them somewhat easier to use, although the contents are essentially the same.
The indexing problems have been rectified by the digitization of the Serial Set. At least two private companies, LexisNexis and Readex, have digitized it and made it full-text searchable.
[The Serial Set and American State Papers are available in GenealogyBank. Click here to search them online]
This article can only hint at some of the genealogical possibilities that can be found in the Congressional Serial Set. It has not touched on the land survey, railroad, western exploration, or lighthouse keeper’s reports or many of the private relief petitions and claims. Nonetheless, the reports and documents in the Serial Set provide a tremendous and varied amount of information for researchers interested in family history.
Jeffery Hartley is chief librarian for the Archives Library Information Center (ALIC). A graduate of Dickinson College and the University of Maryland’s College of Library and Information Services, he joined the National Archives and Records Administration in 1990.
1 For a more complete description of the American State Papers, and their genealogical relevance, see Chris Naylor, “Those Elusive Early Americans: Public Lands and Claims in the American State Papers, 1789–1837,” Prologue: Quarterly of the National Archives and Records Administration 37 (Summer 2005): 54–61.
2 H. Rept. 78 (21-2), 1831, “Archibald Jackson” (Serial 210).
3 H. Rept. 818 (25-2), 1838, “Land Claims between Perdido and Mississippi” Serial 335.
4 S. Doc. 3 (16-2), 1820, “Reports of the Land Commissioners at Jackson Court House” (Serial 42).
5 H. Misc. Doc. 32 (48-2), 1882, “3rd Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology” (Serial 2317).
6 H. Doc. 35 (28-1), 1844, “Annual Report of Solicitor of the Treasury” (Serial 441), p. 37. 7 H. Doc. 1348 (61-3), 1911, “Annual Report of the Commissioner of Patents for the Year 1910″ (Serial 6020).
8 H. Exec. Doc. 62 (39-1), 1867, “Annual Report of the Commissioner of Patents for the Year 1865″ (Serial 1257-1259).
9 H. Exec. Doc. 108 (39-1), 1866, “Artificial Limbs Furnished to Soldiers” (Serial 1263).
10 S. Doc. 392 (64-1), 1916, “Eighteenth Report of the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution, October 11, 1914, to October 11, 1915″ (Serial 6924), p.155. 11 H. Exec. Doc. 1 (40-2), “Tenth Annual Report of the Columbia Institution for the Deaf and Dumb” (Serial 1326), pp. 429–430.
12 H. Doc. 35 (15-1), 1818 (Serial 6), p. 17.
13 See H. Ex. Doc. 10 (31-2), 1850, “Sundry Lists of Pensioners” (Serial 597).
14 See S. Misc. Doc 53 (39-2), 1867, “Report of the Adjutant General for the State of Arkansas, for the Period of the Late Rebellion, and to November 1, 1866″ (Serial 1278).
15 A good discussion of how some of these indexes work can be found in Mary Lardgaard, “Beginner’s Guide to Indexes to the Nineteenth Century U.S. Serial Set,” Government Publications Review 2 (1975): 303–311.

It is obvious that some people are more successful in different intellectual domains than others. Gardner's Multiple Intelligences suggests eight different domains of intellectual skill people can identify with. The domains consist of the following, in which people can score any level in all categories: linguistic, logico-mathematical, spatial, musical, bodily-kinesthetic, interpersonal, intrapersonal and naturalistic. Although his model is impossible to falsify, this idea is important because it serves as a good starting point in which scientists can begin distinguishing what qualifies as an "intelligence" versus a talent. However, it is possible that talents and intelligence are actually the same, when intelligence is defined among Gardner's approach. It is impossible to say Einstein had a talent in math yet didn't identify with that intelligence. A causation approach seems to be inapplicable because research points towards intelligence being considerably stable, while talents can be improved... yet those talents remain in the same realm as its partnering intelligence. This article talks about how there is a controversy on the misuse of his idea into new teaching methods. However, who said that just because someone is intelligent in music means that they will all of a sudden learn geography classes significantly better based on singing the information? They would simply just excel in the musical part of tasks, further concluding their continued talent/intelligence. As suggested in the text, I prefer to conclude I have an intelligence in humor, but one could beg to differ. Overall, I now wonder if someones IQ could actually be the degree in which every arguable intelligence is taken into consideration, then somehow calculated. The WAIS test seems to imply there are different areas of intelligence, so why not add them all...? Oh, how psychology is incredibly ambiguous.
Multiple Intelligences: possibly interchangeable with talent?
TrackBack URL: http://blog.lib.umn.edu/cgi-bin/mt-tb.cgi/168052

Reflecting on the story of the Internal Revenue Service targeting groups with names that included tea party, patriot or any other name that marks a group as pro Constitutional, pro Freedom or pro Bill of Rights, leads us to consider the history of the IRS.
Why would you even approach the IRS for blessing? Your group is, itself considered to be an enemy of the Fed to which the IRS owes allegiance. Any way they can, the IRS will cause opposition to its perceived enemy. Did the American army ask the enemy governments to finance them for WWI or WWII?
The federal income tax was created in 1913 with the ratification of the 16th amendment to the Constitution. Before that time the Fed ran on “tariffs.” Using only tariffs was wise, it kept the government constrained to its Constitutional duties. There were some high tariffs, which did cause some anger and resulted in the “Tariff of Abominations,” but even that was not so high as to stifle the free enterprise system. And the Fed had plenty of money to run what is properly within its scope.
In arguments during the consideration of the 16th amendment (1909), Representative Samuel McCall (Mass.) stated “….leads me to believe that the chief purpose of the tax is not financial, but social. It is not primarily to raise money for the state, but to regulate the citizen and to regenerate the moral nature of man. The individual citizen will be called on to lay bare the inner-most recesses of his soul in affidavits, and with the aid of the Federal inspector, who will supervise his books and papers and business secrets, he may be made to be good, according the notions of virtue at the moment prevailing in Washington.” Continue Reading →

“In nine months, a group of children left alone with a computer in any language will reach the same standard as an office secretary in the West.” ~ Dr. Sugata Mitra
One fine day on 26 January 1999, the Chief scientist at NIIT and his team plan to dig a hole in their office wall adjacent to the Delhi Slum Area. They install a freely accessible computer and observe the rest. This computer created instant ripples and the inferences were revolutionary. The slum children not only learn basic computer skills but teach other children as well. This experiment known as the Hole in the Wall is the discovery of Professor Sugata Mitra. He also coined the concept of Minimally Invasive Education; a pedagogy under which children driven by curiosity and peer support teach themselves and others.
Professor Sugata Mitra had always been fascinated with the idea of unsupervised learning and computers and when finally he put it into practice, it won him another award. On Tuesday, February 26. Dr. Mitra was given the TED Award 2013 which grants him $1 million to set up his own learning laboratory based on this concept.
Dr. Mitra plans to set up learning spaces that would be totally automated and controlled from the Cloud. The supervisor will not be a teacher or a computer expert but only a safety and health supervisor. Probably set up in India, these learning spaces would take the Hole in the Wall Experiment to the implementation stage.
Dr. Mitra has been the Chief Scientist at NIIT and is currently Professor of Educational Technology at Newcastle University, UK. Dr. Mitra is a winner of “Man of Peace Award” from Together for Peace Foundation, USA, and “Social Innovation Award” from Institute of Social Inventions, UK. He has also been given the “Dewang Mehta Award” by the Government of India in recognition for his work related to Hole-in-the-Wall.
According to Dr.Mitra, the learners of the new age need two things. A broadband connection and a teacher to stand back. He says, “The Victorians were great engineers. They engineered a [schooling] system that was so robust that it’s still with us today, continuously producing identical people for a machine that no longer exists.”
We were fortunate enough to have Prof. Mitra with us in one of the WizIQ Conversations. You can revisit his works and words anytime. Professor Mitra was self-taught and has a firm belief that others can do the same through technology and the Internet.
Finally I leave you with a reiteration of the topic:
Are teachers really keeping students from learning in the digital age?

Get the Today’s Document App
Tag: October 10
On February 27, 1951, the Twenty-Second Amendment was ratified, officially limiting Presidents to two terms. This cartoon satirizes Theodore Roosevelt’s reversal of his anti-third term promise during the election of 1912. After his victory in the 1904 election, President Theodore Roosevelt promised that although his first term had lasted only three years (beginning after the [...]
Posted by Darren Cole on February 27, 2011, under Documents, February, October.
Highest Rated Documents
Find Documentsfor May 21
Subscribe to Email Updates
You can also subscribe to the RSS feed

HPV virus is linked to 25,000 cancers over five years. The human wart virus known as HPV caused 25,000 cases of cancer in the United States between 1998 and 2003, including not only cervical cancer but also anal and mouth cancers, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported on Monday. The study suggests the need for screening of both men and women to be expanded for human papillomavirus, or HPV, said another team of researchers, who did a similar study. HPV includes about 100 different viruses, and they are the leading cause of cervical cancer. The viruses, transmitted sexually and by skin-to-skin contact, can also cause anal and penile cancers, as well as cancers of the mouth and throat. HPV also causes common warts. Both Merck and Co. and GlaxoSmithKline make vaccines against some of the strains of HPV most strongly linked with cervical cancer, but not all. The vaccines are recommended for girls and young women who have not yet become sexual activity. ”Currently available HPV vaccines have the potential to reduce the rates of HPV-associated cancers, like oral and anal cancers, that are currently on the rise and for which there is no effective or widely applied screening programs,” the CDC’s Dr. Mona Saraiya, who led the study, said in a statement. “This gives us baseline data to measure the impact of HPV vaccine and cervical cancer screening programs in reducing the incidence of cervical cancer and other HPV-associated cancers… .”
Sleep is seen as the newest obesity fighter. Consistently getting a good night’s sleep may help protect children from becoming overweight adults, a study published Monday suggests. Researchers found that among more than 1,000 people followed from birth to age 32, those who got too little sleep as children were more likely than their well-rested counterparts to become obese adults, Reuters News reports. The link between sleep deprivation during childhood and obesity risk later in life held up even when the researchers figured in things like the impact of a child’s weight or TV habits, and adulthood exercise level. All of this supports the idea that early sleep habits have a direct effect on weight in the long term, according to Dr. Robert John Hancox, the study’s senior author. “Although we cannot prove that this is a cause-and-effect relationship,” he told Reuters Health, “this study provides strong evidence that it probably is.”
Eating more fish can help you control diabetes. Centering your dinner around a fish dish at least twice a week might help people with diabetes lower their risk of kidney disease, a study suggests. In the November issue of the American Journal of Kidney Diseases, British researchers analyzed the records of more than 22,300 middle-aged and older English men and women who were part of a large European cancer study to determine the effect of fish on kidney disease. What they found is that of the 517 study subjects who had diabetes (most of whom had type 2), those who on average ate less than one serving of fish each week were four times as likely to have albumin in their urine than people with diabetes who ate fish twice a week. Adler speculates that the nutrient content of fish may affect kidney function and improve blood glucose control. But the researchers could not say what type of fish had the biggest impact, reports USA Today.To get more help with diabetes, go to BET.com/Body &Soul.

Mississippians know the strength of longleaf pines. These native trees braved Hurricane Katrina 48 percent better than their loblolly cousins. Even so, the ancient longleaf pine forests of the South are a threatened ecosystem.
These forests once dominated the region, spanning 90 million acres. Now, they cover just 3 million acres. As longleaf habitat disappears, so do many important and endangered species, like the gopher tortoise, which rely on it. The gopher tortoise is considered a keystone species in longleaf pine habitat, with more than 300 different vertebrate and invertebrate species relying on burrows dug by the reptiles for their homes.
Longleaf pine forests are home to at least 122 endangered or threatened plant and animal species. In addition, they can contain as many as 300 different species of groundcover plants per acre, and about 60 percent of the amphibian and reptile species found in the Southeast.
USDA’s Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) wants to restore longleaf forests to their former glory with the help of landowners like Orby Wright of Purvis, Miss. The Healthy Forests Reserve Program (HFRP) offered by NRCS allows Wright to manage his tall stands of longleaf pines and the blanket of legumes and forbs across the understory of his Quail Hollow Ranch. HFRP is one of several programs in the tool chest of the Longleaf Pine Initiative, a nine-state effort to bolster longleaf pine forests.
Forbs are clovers, sunflowers, milkweed and other common wildflowers typical of the Mississippi forest floor. Both forbs and legumes provide sustenance and cover for a wide range of wildlife.
Wright purchased about 2,000 acres four years ago from a pecan company. The land boasts longleaf pines of different ages—some are decades old, while others are just saplings. With the help of NRCS, Wright has planted new longleaf pines while taking care of his older, taller trees.
A healthy longleaf pine ecosystem requires occasional fires. Many years ago, wildfires frequented the longleaf landscape, creating food for wildlife and providing other benefits. To help maintain this rugged habitat, Wright has installed fire lanes and carries out prescribed burns, all with NRCS’ assistance.
So far, NRCS programs have helped restore 1,641 acres of longleaf pines in Mississippi and assisted in prescribed burns on 1,812 acres. In Lamar County, where Wright lives, 669 acres of longleaf pines were restored in 2010.
Approved participants receive financial assistance for implementing conservation practices including planting longleaf pine, installing firebreaks, conducting prescribed burning and controlling invasive plants.
Check out more conservation stories on the USDA blog.
Follow NRCS on Twitter.

Millennial themes: age, education, services
December 01, 1999
The Bureau of Labor Statistics recently released its work force projections for the period 1998-2008.
Some of the themes that may be important to watch unfolding over the next several years include:
- The continuing aging of the labor force. The median age of workers is projected to rise to nearly 41 years. At that level, the median age of the labor force will just exceed the previous high of 40.5 years reached in 1962.
- The growing importance of education. Occupations that require at least an associate degree will account for 40 percent of all job growth out to 2008, compared to a one-quarter share of all jobs that existed in 1998.
- The dominance of the service-producing sector as a source of employment growth. In the projection period—1998 to 2008—the service sector will account for more than 90 percent of job growth.
Projections of the labor force and the industrial and occupational composition of employment are a product of the Employment Projections program. To find out more, see articles from the November 1999 issue of Monthly Labor Review.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, The Editor's Desk, Millennial themes: age, education, services on the Internet at http://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/1999/nov/wk5/art03.htm (visited May 21, 2013).
Spotlight on Statistics: Productivity
This edition of Spotlight on Statistics examines labor productivity trends from 2000 through 2010 for selected industries and sectors within the nonfarm business sector of the U.S. economy. Read more »

Marlin, Blue – Hawaii
Blue Marlin is a large pelagic species, found globally in both tropical and temperate waters. Blue Marlin mature early, produce many eggs , and grow fast, reaching sizes up to 450 cm and 900 kg.
They are caught commercially throughout the Pacific Ocean and are considered to comprise a single, ocean-wide population. The last population assessment for Blue Marlin in the Pacific indicated that abundance levels were moderate, but the assessment has not been updated for over a decade. There is some indication that Blue Marlin abundance around Hawaii may be declining.
This species is primarily captured with pelagic longlines, which result in minimal habitat damage and moderate bycatch rates. Around Hawaii, trolling is another common method used to catch Blue Marlin. Regulations for pelagic fisheries that capture Blue Marlin are set at both the international and national level, and include measures to effectively reduce fishery interactions with protected seabirds and sea turtles.
This fish may have high levels of mercury that could pose a health risk to adults and children. More mercury info here.

Swordfish – Indian Ocean
Swordfish is a large, pelagic species found throughout tropical and temperate waters around the globe. They grow at moderate rates and produce many eggs.
In the Indian Ocean, Swordfish are captured by fishing fleets from many nations including Taiwan, Spain, Pakistan and Japan. Their abundance decreased through the 1990s and early 2000s as catches increased, but current Swordfish abundance in the Indian Ocean is at a medium level.
The majority of Swordfish in the Indian Ocean are taken with pelagic longlines, and some with gillnets. These fishing gears result in minimal habitat damage, but may accidentally catch endangered and protected species like sea turtles. Regulations for Swordfish fisheries are set by the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, but compliance with these regulations at the national level is poor.
This fish may have high levels of mercury that could pose a health risk to adults and children. More mercury info here.

NASA is giving the public the power to journey through the solar system using a new interactive Web-based tool. The "Eyes on the Solar System" interface combines video game technology and NASA data to...
Wednesday, 07 September 2011
This is basically a Key Stage 2 maths website - but we also offer many Key Stage 1 and some early Key Stage 3 materials. This is what you'll find here : The TOPICS section contains simple, straightf...
Tuesday, 06 September 2011
See the great new features (if you can't see the video it means You Tube is blocked at your school!) 9XtEqyTkneY See global changes with decades of historical imagery If you've ever wondered how y...
Wednesday, 11 February 2009
Education Bradford resources and guidance to delivering ICT across the Primary Curriculum. This area will develop over the coming months. If you have any queries about developing a scheme of work or ...
Thursday, 18 December 2008

Combined Gas Law
The Combined Gas Law combines Charles Law, Boyle s Law and Gay Lussac s Law. The Combined Gas Law states that a gas pressure x volume x temperature = constant.
Alright. In class you should have learned about the three different gas laws. the first one being Boyle's law and it talks about the relationship between pressure and volume of a particular gas. The next one should be Charles law which talks about the volume and temperature of a particular gas. And the last one should be Gay Lussac's law which talks about the relationship between pressure and temperature of a particular gas. Okay. But what happens when you have pressure, volume and temperature all changing? Well, we're actually going to combine these gas laws to form one giant gas law called the combined gas law. Okay.
If you notice then these three gas laws the pressure and volume are always in the numerator. So we're going to keep them on the numerator. p1v1. And notice the temperature is in the denominator over t1. So all these things are just squished into one and then p2v2 over t2. Okay. So this is what we're going to call the combined gas law. So let's actually get an example and do one together.
Alright, so I have a problem up here that says a gas at 110 kilo pascals and 33 celsius fills a flexible container with an initial volume of two litres, okay? If the temperature is raised to 80 degrees celsius and the pressure is raised to 440 kilo pascals, what is the new volume? Okay. So notice we have three variables. We're talking about pressure, temperature and volume. Okay, so now we're going to employ this combined gas law dealing with all three of these variables. So we're going to look at our first, our first number 110 kilo pascals and that's going to, that is the unit of pressure. So we know that's p1. Our p1 is 110 kilo pascals, at 30 degree celsius. I don't like things with celsius so I'm going to change this to kelvin. So I'm going to add 273 to that which makes it 303 kelvin. That's our temperature. And my initial volume is two litres so I'm going to say v1=2 litres. Okay then I continue reading. If the temperature is raised at 80 degree celsius, again we want it in kelvin, so we're going to add 273 making it to 353. So our t2 is 353 kelvin and the pressure increased to 440 kilo pascals, the pressure p2 is equal to 440 kilo pascals which I'm very happy that I kept it in kilo pascals that I kept it in kilo pascals. I've got to make sure these units are the same because pressure can be measured in several different units. I'm going to make sure all units are the same. And what is the new volume? So our v2 is our variable, what we're trying to find. Okay.
So let's basically plug all these variable in into our combined gas law to figure out what the new volume would be. Okay. So I'm going to erase this and say our pressure one is 110 kilo pascals. Our volume one is two litres. Our temperature one is 303 kelvin. Our pressure two is 440 kilo pascals. We don't know our volume so we're just going to say v2 over 353 kelvin. Okay. When I'm looking for a variable I'm going to cross multiply these guys. So I'm going to say 353 times 110 times 2 and that should give me seven, 77660, if you put that in a calculator. So I just cross multiply these guys. And I cross multiply these guys 303 times 440 times v2 gives me 133320v2. Okay, so then I want to get my, I want to isolate my variable, so I'm going to divide 133320. 133320. And I find that my new volume is 0.58. 0.58 metres. And that is how you do the combined gas law.

Disease outbreaks, such as cholera, are commonly thought to happen after earthquakes and other natural disasters, but studies have found no evidence to support this. And the persistence of this belief may be hurting relief efforts.
The devastating earthquake in Haiti in January 2010 was followed by a deadly cholera outbreak. Many saw this as an inevitable outcome of the disaster, as poor sanitary conditions combined with numerous dead bodies and survivors housed in cramped quarters to produce an incubator for deadly diseases.
“It’s what all of us worried about when we arrived in Haiti just hours after the quake,” said NBC's Brian Williams, according to Popular Science. “Beyond the death toll, the inevitable spread of disease.”
However, a forensic analysis of the outbreak has shown that it had very little to do with either the earthquake or the conditions in Haiti afterwards.
The spread of the disease was traced back to a small military base, that was built years before, and its faulty sanitation system that allowed human fecal matter to pollute the nearby river. Analysis of the strain of Vibrio cholerae that swept through the Haitian population showed that it was identical to the one that was infecting people in Nepal, where some of the soldiers at the base were stationed before they joined the Haiti relief efforts.
[ More Geekquinox: Man maps out stunning Earth-like Mars ]
The problem with the belief in the 'inevitability' of the outbreak, according to what journalist and author Jonathan M. Katz wrote in his PopSci article, is "most journalists and responders shrugged off cholera as a natural product of the disaster. The attitude made epidemiologists and aid workers less likely to seek out the source of what was in fact a particular infection not only new to Haiti, but the entire hemisphere."
"And it has since continued to provide cover for the United Nations as advocates press for reparations, and public health experts try to reform the peacekeeping system to prevent such a catastrophic error from happening again." he added.
"Conditioned to look for a problem that wasn’t there, responders ignored the greatest public health threat of all: themselves."

Native American (Navajo) woman sits in a brush shelter and prepares ground cornmeal. A pile of corncobs and husks and a pile of ground cornmeal lie on outspread blankets in front of the woman. Above the woman's head is a coffee can which reads...
Indians of North America--Domestic life--1900-1910.; Navajo Indians--Women--1900-1910.; Corn--1900-1910.; Home food processing--1900-1910.; Interiors--1900-1910.
Display a larger image and more item information when the pointer pauses over a thumbnail
Thumbnail with title
Grid with smaller thumbnails and more detail
Select the collections to add or remove from your search

Water, United States, North America, Government, Membranes
Quenching a Desert Community's Thirst
Desalination Facilities Create Sustainable Water Supply for El Paso
In the arid southwestern United States, El Paso Water Utilities was challenged by limited freshwater resources. To create a sustainable drinking water supply, the utility formed a unique partnership with Fort Bliss Army Base, and implemented the 27.5-million-gallon-per-day (mgd) Kay Bailey Hutchison desalination facilities—North America’s largest desalination plant.
North America’s largest desalination system applies reverse osmosis membranes to treat brackish groundwater and uses deep-well injection for inland disposal of concentrate—delivering reliable, economical drinking water to a growing desert community.
The $87 million, state-of-the-art project taps brackish groundwater beneath the desert floor. We uniquely applied and refined reverse osmosis membranes—a proven technology for coastal desalination—for this inland application. Fueled by solar energy, deep-well injection safely deposits 3-mgd of concentrate more than 3,500 feet below ground with no adverse environmental impacts.
Supported by this new drinking water supply, the Army increased personnel and operations at Fort Bliss, supporting military readiness and benefiting the local economy. This flagship project demonstrates a holistic water supply approach—integrating fresh groundwater, brackish groundwater and surface water to maximize limited supplies. It will serve as a model and center of learning for other communities that are looking for sustainable options to meet their long-term water needs.

Previous |Next |Title
Although the process of forming national constitutions in European states began more than two centuries ago, the actual texts of EU member state constitutions all date from the present century, with the single, obvious exception of the British constitution. The venerable British texts merit an obligatory nod of tribute to that paradoxical cradle of the constitutional state. A few European constitutional texts are the cumulative result of successive reforms of texts originally drafted in the nineteenth century or earlier, and are found in those societies that managed to avoid the dramatic upheavals which punctuate the histories of other European states. The majority of the constitutions were promulgated after the Second World War, following governmental ruptures of varying intensity and duration. A final group of texts have their origin in the inter-war period and were drafted concurrent to the creation, or re-creation, of their corresponding states.
The "reformed" texts often contain some structural traces of their origins in the preservation of the monarchy, or in the use of traditional formulae. However, the depth of the changes that were carried out makes it virtually impossible to establish clear distinctions, based upon constitutional content, between these and the newer texts. Even those differences arising from the opposition of monarchy and republic are difficult to delineate clearly, in part due to the anomaly presented by Spain. The Spanish constitution is a new constitution, but it is also monarchical. In addition, the opposition in Spain to the constitutional order is no longer of political importance. The King of Spain is reputed to have stated long before his coronation that "my aspiration is to be king of a Spanish Republic" - a sentiment that acknowledged the reality that European monarchies are nothing more than republics with crowns.
 This set of cases includes Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Sweden.
 The Swedish Instrument of Government, the oldest written constitution in Europe, dates from 1720.
 Prolonged and serious ruptures occurred in Germany, Spain, Greece, Italy, and Portugal. In France the rupture brought about by the Vichy regime was shorter and concluded with the Constitution of 1946. A new and clear break occurred in 1958 when political circumstances surrounding the army revolt in Algeria led to the replacement of the 1946 Constitution.
 Included here are the cases of Austria, Finland, and Ireland. These constitutions have a number of distinctive characteristics which are not considered here.
 In the case of Belgium, the extent of the constitutional reform affected the very contour of the state.
Previous |Next |Title
Top of the page

- Autonomy and freedom from bureaucratic rules
- Choice for parents, so they can choose to leave schools that fail them and go to schools that they think will do better
- A willingness to take risks
- A willingness to close or replace innovations and charters that fail
Here's what I think is the key passage:
How much risk and failure are we willing to tolerate to create much better schools for students who don’t have them today? Or, put another way, if I told you there was a way to create 10 outstanding networks of schools for students who lack decent educational options now but that the cost of doing this would be the creation of four lousy networks of schools, would you take the deal?
Critics of charter schools say this choice is a false one and that we should instead focus on improving existing schools. But their argument ignores the immediacy of educational failure. We’re talking about communities where public schools are not failing just a little but where the catastrophe of broken lives unfolds every school year, places where less than half of high schoolers graduate and where fewer than one in ten students finish college by their mid-20s. And let’s not forget, despite all the noise about turning around persistently failing schools, that successful turnarounds are like snow leopards — more mythical than actually observed.
Charter proponents also disagree with the lose-some-to-win-some premise. Their main argument against it is that bad charters can be shut down. It’s true that this does happen — government officials have refused to renew some charters — but it’s proving to be more difficult in practice than in theory. There is an old saw in education that closing a school is like moving a cemetery: you get very little help from the inside. Charter parents and teachers often resist school closures just like their counterparts in the traditional system, and today there are not enough effective — read strong — charter school authorizers around the country.And I agree with that completely. If we want to achieve great success, the only way to figure out what works better is to try new approaches, and some of those approaches will not succeed--may even be worse than already exists. But the difference is the choice that parents have. Leaving just the monopoly system without real variety and choice for parents shackles students to a school and a system that has been mediocre or worse for decades. When charters fail, there are no shackles, and parents can freely leave to greener pastures.
However, Utah also faces the same conundrum from the study noted above, namely that parents and school officials often resist the closure of a charter just like the same groups do at traditional schools. That makes it politically difficult to pull the closing trigger, and it's never actually happened in Utah.
I'm a free-market guy who generally believes that if parents are satisfied enough to stay a a school, even if the bureaucracy or the government doesn't like it, we should give deference to what parents are choosing as the best option for their kid, even if the system thinks they shouldn't. Finding the balance between parental choice and public accountability is a tricky balance.
So, I suggest that Utah needs the following:
- Expansion of charter schools, particularly successful charter schools, so that parents' choices are not limited by mile-long waiting lists;
- School districts that embrace innovation, relying less on boundaries, and that really empower schools to innovate and achieve--along with the inherent risks that come with allowing parents to choose to leave;
- A realistic mechanism to close or replace failing schools, both traditional and charter, including making it easier to convert a traditional school to a charter (the state Charter Board has made progress in this area, but I believe they also need an enrollment trigger);
- Real freedom in schools to allow for the variety that gives families real choices, including freedom in whom they hire, what they teach (let a school decide that more time teaching reading is more important than teaching how to use laundry detergent), and how they spend money;
- No fear to try something and fail.

Epilepsy Phenome/Genome Project (EPGP)
The purpose of this study is to collect detailed information about the characteristics and genetics of a large number of individuals with epilepsy.
|Study Design:||Observational Model: Case Control
Time Perspective: Prospective
|Official Title:||Epilepsy Phenome/Genome Project: A Phenotype/Genotype Analysis of Epilepsy|
- EPGP will recruit persons with specific forms of epilepsy. DNA will be isolated from participants' blood and genetic variants associated with common forms of epilepsy will be identified. [ Time Frame: over 4.5 years ] [ Designated as safety issue: No ]
Biospecimen Retention: Samples With DNA
|Study Start Date:||November 2007|
|Estimated Study Completion Date:||December 2013|
|Estimated Primary Completion Date:||December 2012 (Final data collection date for primary outcome measure)|
individuals with epilepsy
Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological disorders and is a major public health concern. Approximately 30 percent of people with epilepsy have medically intractable epilepsy, and the medical and social consequences of the disorder are enormous. Treatments developed for epilepsy have largely been experimental rather than based on knowledge of basic mechanisms because the mechanisms are poorly understood.
The Epilepsy Phenome/Genome Project (EPGP) is a large-scale, international, multi-institutional, collaborative research project aimed at advancing the understanding of the genetic basis of the most common forms of epilepsy.
The overall goal of EPGP is to collect detailed, high quality phenotypic (i.e., characteristics of individuals, from the molecular level to the whole person) information on persons with epilepsy and to compare the phenotypic information with genomic information. EPGP will provide a resource that may lead to many discoveries related to the diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy, including the eventual development of new therapies based on a better understanding of causes of the disorder.
Show 25 Study Locations
|Principal Investigator:||Daniel Lowenstein, MD||University of California, San Francisco, Department of Neurology|
|Principal Investigator:||Ruben Kuzniecky, MD||New York University, Comprehensive Epilepsy Center|

Cybercrime costs $388 billion dollars in annual losses globally and it affected almost 7 in 10 adults last year.
This week Norton is released the results of the Norton Cybercrime Report 2011, a study on the impact of cybercrime that included a survey of over 12,000 adults in 24 countries. This provides an important and accurate picture of the scope of cybercrime globally and the results are shocking! Every day of the past year, over 1 million online adults in 24 countries experienced cybercrime. This can also be broken down to 50,000 victims per hour, 820 victims per minute, or 14 victims every second. In just the last 12 months 44% of people have been a victim of cybercrime while only 15% have been a victim of physical crime in the same period.
I regularly meet with law enforcement who are fighting cybercrime. The above statistics clearly illustrate the biggest challenge faced by law enforcement—the enormous scope of the problem. With so many victims in many different countries, police can successfully stop one cybercriminal but still be left with thousands of more cases. The police do a great job trying to stop cybercrime but the problem requires significantly more resources than are currently being devoted to stop it.
Only 21% of people in the Norton study reported the cybercrime to law enforcement. This also creates a significant problem for police and prosecutors. Some prosecutors will only accept cases that exceed a certain amount of victims or high level of damages. US law allows federal prosecutors to combine multiple victims into a common case if the crime is linked. This is critical in many cybercrime cases where there may be a small number of victims who have lost a relatively small amount individually. However, failure to report cybercrime prevents law enforcement from effectively addressing the problem.
Finally, the key message of this report is one of hope. Despite the really frightening statistics on the scale of cybercrime, cybercrime is still largely a preventable crime. Globally the three most common reported forms of cybercrime were viruses, online scams, and phishing attacks. All of these crimes are largely preventable by following good security practices and using updated security software. I have worked with crime victims in some capacity for over a decade now. Nobody wants to be a victim. The police are trying to help but it is an extremely rare cybercrime case in which a victim actually recovers their lost money . Time dealing with cybercrime is also lost forever. It is far better to use good security software and follow careful safety steps online that can greatly reduce the likelihood of becoming one of the 7 in 10 global cybercrime victims last year.

Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA)
Passed in 1996, The Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) denies federal recognition of gay marriages and gives each state the right to refuse recognition of same-sex marriage licenses issued by other states. The act does not prohibit states from allowing gay marriages, but neither does it obligate states to recognize the gay marriages from other states. For the first time in history, the federal government defines marriage in the Act as a "legal union between one man and one woman as husband and wife," and spouse is defined as "a person of the opposite sex who is a husband or a wife." Marriages that do not fit this description are not eligible for any benefits offered by the federal government.
For More Information on DOMA, see Senate Subcommittee Hearing on the Proposed Federal Defense of Marriage Act.

A compiler is a computer program that takes code and generates either object code or translates code in one language into another language. When it generates code into another language usually the other language is either compiled (into object code) , interpreted , or even compiled again into another language. Object code can be run on your computer as a regular program. In the days when compute time cost thousands of dollars compilation was done by hand. Now compilation is usually done by a program.
edit-hint Expand to compilation techniques?

Expanding community resources: A collaborative effort
- Chapter 7. Teaching and Learning Basic Invasion-Game Tactics in 4th Grade: A Descriptive Study From Situated and Constraints Theoretical Perspectives. Rovegno, Inez; Nevett, Michael; Brock, Sheri; Babiarz, Matthew // Journal of Teaching in Physical Education;Jul2001, Vol. 20 Issue 4, p370
Focuses on the description of invasion-game tactics using theoretical perspective. Implication of the content, instruction and learning; Recognition of the qualitative data; Identification of the high-ability and low-ability group.
- The learning revolution: Perched at the millennium. O'Banion, Terry // Community College Week;01/12/98, Vol. 10 Issue 12, p4
Opinion. Comments on the shift which has emerged in education in the United States, focusing on that change in community colleges. What this shift emerged initially as; How some observers characterized this shift; Need for overhauling the architecture of education.
- Feedback. Kelley, Susan; Jones, Barbara; Gordon, Brian // Community College Week;07/27/98, Vol. 10 Issue 26, p5
Presents several feedback from educators on the learning revolution. Problems with student learning; Measurement of the effectiveness of teaching; Support for and conversation about learning colleges.
- What's your learning style? // Current Health 1;Oct96 1 of 2, Vol. 20 Issue 2, p23
Describes a variety of learning styles. Visual learning; Aural learning; Cooperative learning; Highlights of a teacher-students discussion on learning styles.
- The notebook. White, Elizabeth Ross // Christian Science Monitor;6/16/98, Vol. 90 Issue 140, pB2
Offers news briefs related to learning. Gorp.com, a web site that provides outdoor recreation information; Details on the Children's Scholarship Fund; Maine College of Art exchange program with Hanoi Fine Arts College in Vietnam; Ministers to teach religion in a public high school in Buena...
- Alignment and gategory learning. Lassaline, Mary E.; Murphy, Gregory L. // Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory & Cognition;Jan1998, Vol. 24 Issue 1, p144
Presents information on a series of studies which shows that alignment is involved in category learning. Details on the experiments; Results of the experiments; Discussion on the experiments.
- Dynamic changes in hypermnesia across early and late tests; A relation/item-specific account. McDaniel, Mark A.; Moore, Brent A.; Whiteman, Howard L. // Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory & Cognition;Jan1998, Vol. 24 Issue 1, p173
Presents information on experiments which tested predictions derived from R.R.Hunt, and M.A.McDaniel's relational/item-specific account of hypermnesia. Methodology of the experiments; Results of the experiments; Discussion on the experiments.
- Influences of temporal organization on sequence learning and transfer: Comments on Stadler (1995).. Dominey, Peter Ford // Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory & Cognition;Jan1998, Vol. 24 Issue 1, p234
Investigates the hypothesis that both the serial order of events and their temporal organization influence the internal representation of a sequence and thus influence its learnability. Methodology of the investigation; Results of the investigation; Discussion on the investigation.
- Helping your child learn. // Humpty Dumpty's Magazine;Dec96, Vol. 44 Issue 8, p34
Suggests techniques to encourage learning in children. Promotion of reading by setting up a home library; Telling of family stories; Meeting with teachers.

Martial arts is the collective name given to a variety of hand-to-hand fighting styles, or fighting styles that involve weapons that are used as an extension of the body. Most fighting styles are unique to a particular culture, such as Karate to Japan, and TaeKwonDo to Korea. While many have roots in the period BC, there are variations of the styles that evolved in the last 200 years.
Interestingly enough, Karate is more of an anti-martial art, designed to help common folk prepare to fight against martial rule, during a time of weapons bans. Kara te do means "empty hand way" referencing this style without weapons. TaeKwonDo means "the way of the hands and feet".
Most martial arts were originally intended to be used for serious fighting, but in the modern age they are mainly practised as sports, with strictly codified rules; indeed some, such as Judo, were developed from other martial arts purely for sporting purposes. Many people, especially women, also learn martial arts for self-defense.

What Your—Grader Needs to Know
In one volume per grade, this eight-volume series provides parents, teachers, and children with an introduction to the important knowledge outlined in the Core Knowledge Sequence. More…
Learn how Core Knowledge schools in nearly every state are succeeding with a sequenced, solid, specific, and shared curriculum. More…
Benefits of Core KnowledgeAll Stakeholders Benefit from a Coherent, Cumulative, and Content-Specific Curriculum
- provides a broad base of knowledge, and
- provides the rich vocabulary needed for reading achievement and academic success.
- provides a plan for coherent, sequenced learning from grade to grade,
- promotes teamwork and an institution-wide focus, and
- enables schools to work more effectively while meeting and exceeding state standards.
For School Districts
- decreases the learning gaps caused by student mobility,
- provides a strong foundation of knowledge for success in high school and beyond,
- creates a common focus to share information and expertise, and
- encourages cooperation among schools to provide a quality learning experiences for all students.
For Parents and Communities
- enhances accountability and parental engagement by providing a clear outline of what children are expected to learn in school, and
- provides a common ground for communication—in school and in life.

Last Updated: Feb 17, 2012
Fair trade is a sales model that honors each participant in the production and purchase process. It focuses on sustainability and protection of the environment, and is rooted in fair economic practices and interpersonal connections. When you purchase an item labeled as fair trade, you are helping support fair prices, environmental protections, direct trade, fair labor conditions, and local communities.
Why Buy Fair Trade
Our modern world economy puts a heavy focus on the bottom line: in the decision between two similar products, price is usually the deciding factor. However, this practice often discriminates against small farmers, craftsmen, and labor cooperatives, since their per-unit production and materials costs are higher than those of mass producers. Additionally, major manufacturers may employ unjust business practices, such as low wages or poor worker rights, to maintain low prices for their finished products.
Fair trade, on the other hand, honors the developing world's small businesses and promotes equal rights for workers and producers around the world. Additionally, this business model supports social development, helping fund schools and community growth, and directly benefits some of the world's poorest communities.
Fair Price & Fair Labor
The international Fair Trade Labeling Organization sets the price for all Fair Trade Certified™ products, ensuring that each item is priced justly. By these standards, a fair price adequately covers the cost the production and living wages for workers. A living wage is defined as sufficient to cover medical care, education, food, shelter and cost of living.
Fair trade companies, farmers and artisans respect their environment and engage in sustainable production. For example, fair trade farmers avoid the use of most agrochemicals by employing natural methods like crop rotation and biological pest control. Almost 85% of Fair Trade Certified™ coffee is produced organically.
The conventional supply chain employs many intermediaries – buyers, exporters, and importers, among others. Fair trade supports a more direct route, connecting a producer or cooperative to a fair trade distributor, then to the store. This process allows for less profit dilution, and fosters long-term relationships between producers and importers.
Support Local Communities
Without fair trade, artisans, farmers and cooperatives from small, developing communities would not have access to the global market. By purchasing fair trade items produced by these workers, you contribute directly to their local economy. In fact, many fair trade producers invest profits back into their businesses and communities. Additionally, all fair trade sales include a "social premium," which is a set fee paid to the cooperative that must be invested in community development. Each cooperative makes a collective decision as to how to invest their social premium.

Influenza, or “the flu,” is a contagious viral infection of the nose, throat, and lungs which occurs most often in the late fall, winter, and early spring. Flu is a serious infection which is associated, on average, with more than 200,000 hospitalizations due to flu related complications and can lead to thousands of deaths every year in the United States.
“No one wants to spread the flu to family, friends, or colleagues. Yet many of us admit to tossing our manners aside when we have the flu,” said Anna Post, great-great-granddaughter of Emily Post and co-author of the 18th edition of Emily Post’s Etiquette. “Knowing how to politely cancel an event you’re hosting or how to avoid shaking your client’s hand because you’re sick can help avoid a potentially difficult and awkward situation. By following appropriate flu etiquette, we can all play a role in preventing the spread of the flu virus.”
The Emily Post Institute offers the following etiquette tips to manage common situations where the flu virus might be spread from one person to another:
1. Share space, not the flu – Covering sneezes and coughs is a good habit all year round, especially during flu season. The flu virus can spread up to six feet away from coughing, sneezing, or even just talking.
2. Know when to take a sick day – The flu is highly contagious and the people you work with don’t want to get sick. Knowing the symptoms of flu versus a cold is important so you know when to take a sick day and see a doctor. Remember the acronym F.A.C.T.S. to recognize if you might have the flu (Fever, Aches, Chills, Tiredness with Sudden Onset).
3. In tight quarters – It’s tough to point out someone’s behavior mid-flight with hours left to go. However, flu is highly contagious. If there’s no other seat available, consider saying, “I can see you’re not feeling well—would you mind covering your mouth when you cough? Thanks.” Most people when prompted are eager to show good manners and do the right thing.
“Every year, millions of Americans get influenza. We are all personally responsible for helping to control its spread,” says Susan J. Rehm, MD, medical director at the National Foundation for Infectious Diseases (NFID). “The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends flu vaccine as the first and most important step in preventing influenza, as well as good hygiene. If symptoms arise, see a doctor quickly. The flu can be treated with prescription antiviral medicines.”
To help children recognize flu symptoms, learn good habits, and pass the time with a fun activity this winter, download a free coloring book at FluFACTS.com. On FluFACTS.com, you’ll find information to help you distinguish between flu and cold symptoms, sign up for flu alerts in your area, and download a free “Fight the Flu” iPhone app.
This influenza education campaign and survey are supported by Genentech, a member of the Roche Group.

In 1996, the Phoenix Zoo's first pair of wolves, Chico and Rosa, gave birth to 3 pups. The female pup was chosen by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association's
Species Survival Plan and the Mexican Wolf Recovery Team to be paired up with a male wolf and released into the wild.
On May 7, 1999 Chico and his new mate, Eureka, produced one healthy pup that was later sent to another breeding facility. In 2003 Eureka was retired to
Southwest Wildlife Rehabilitation Center where she lives with a retired male.
Currently the Zoo has Sonora and Morela, both females born in 2001. The related females are held on exhibit in the Arizona trail. There are no current
plans to breed them. They are part of the SSP and are being housed in a large, naturalistic exhibit meant to properly interpret their current habitat type.
Other species in the same area representing northeastern Arizona are thick billed parrots, bobcats, and a mountain lion. The wolves at the Phoenix Zoo are
managed in a way so that the least amount of interaction as possible is made between them and the animal keepers. This is done to keep the wolves as
"wild" as possible, by fostering behaviors and characteristics that will enhance their ability to survive in the wild.
Wolf Awareness Week is an interpretive program that is held annually. During this week, lectures, presentations, and stands are set up to increase visitor
awareness of wolf issues in general, and of the Mexican wolf reintroduction process in particular.
- Non-invasive research in coordination with the AZA's Reproductive Advisory Group and the Mexican Wolf SSP.
- Coordinated interpretive and research programs in collaboration with Southwest Wildlife Rehabilitation and Education Foundation, as well as other local and
regional NGO's and zoos holding wolves in captivity.
- Review and input into the Wolf Adaptive Management Oversight Committee of the Arizona Game and Fish Department and cooperators during updates and public

RECORD: Darwin, C. R. Geological diary: Port Desire. CUL-DAR34.29-34 Transcribed by Kees Rookmaaker, edited by John van Wyhe (Darwin Online, http://darwin-online.org.uk/).
REVISION HISTORY: Transcribed by Kees Rookmaaker and John van Wyhe, corrections by van Wyhe and Gordon Chancellor 1.2011. RN2
NOTE: This document, part of the largest scientific document composed by Darwin during the voyage of the Beagle, is written mostly in ink. Marginal notes are here integrated into the text.
Editorial symbols used in the transcription:
[some text] 'some text' is an editorial insertion
[some text] 'some text' is the conjectured reading of an ambiguous word or passage
[some text] 'some text' is a description of a word or passage that cannot be transcribed
< > word(s) destroyed
<some text> 'some text' is a description of a destroyed word or passage
Text in small red font is a hyperlink or notes added by the editors.
Reproduced with the permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library and William Huxley Darwin.
N side of River. Porphyry. —ascending which you arrive at a dead level plain, much divided & cut up by vallies one side corresponds to the other. —
This plain reaches up to the foot of two hills ∴ is seen stretching to the West-ward. to the SW. & South of [River].
all level forming square pieces of table land. — covered with gravel of porphyry. —
endless varieties, & some white quartz. pebbles here the size of R Negro but evidently same sort — all water brackish, more or less. V [Bottle]: is it washing any salt water of old sea? In one valley, which was deep, there was a coating of salt which resembled the Salitrales more to the North. — V. Specimen. — On the high plain, there are groups of many shells lying thick together, & curiously perfect, considering
exposure to weather. — Patellae. & Mytilus with colour. — (same as New bay) not covered with diluvium. — recent sea cause of sterility. — I should imagine gravel
10 20 or 30 feet thick, for beneath this there appears a white. calcareo- sandy clay — clayey sandstone in soft. forming beds. seen in vallies at foot of 2 Hills. — same as upper bed at New Bay & R. Chupat. — .
2 Hills — low range of porphyry. generally forming sort of laminae & very imperfectly crystallized. V - - - - — specimen. — compact well crystallized. & the above sort all occurring together. — Porphyry exposed by vallies evidently covered up by the calcareo- sandstone bed. —
Did these hills up-heave. the modern
bed or upheaved with it?
On salt side. rough porphyrys. (a white variety same as in cherry garden occurring with the red sort.). — Britannia rock very porphyritic variety. —
Barranca. about 5 miles on S. shore. — 130 feet high. —
yellowish sandy clay. form a bed about 40 feet high. —
res many large oyster especially in lower part. — chiefly characterized by Turritella. — & many large Arica. — some Pectens: (a Volut. Buccinium (, which I could not bring home). Above this immense bed of gravel. — line of separation horizontal. — Further inland great level plain, same as the northern, with white calcareo-sandstone. which is above level of gravel bed. — Therefore gravel covers great inequalities in lower modern beds. —
Going up Southside of creek. meet many varieties of Porphyry. few miles beyond. Guanaco. Island. I walked into the Interior there appeared to be high table land within. but it really was not evident when approached. — was covered with gravel. & composed of calcareo-sandstone; excessive marks of diluvium.
not now accountable & was vallies going east immense barriers (which are exposed) of Porphyry have been cut through. — Near here. ab calc. sandstone crossed lied upon earthy Porphyry (655. 656). —
& was covered by thin bed of ferruginous sandstone: — at extremity of the creek, rock sublimely peaked & perpendicular valley most abrupt sided. — one side valley suddenly commencing with cliff of 100 feet
present stream minute. depositing fine mud on the rock much pebbles: in course of river one boulder of greenstone. — It is certain that cause much more violent
than now exist. must have acted. such as Volcanoes. (immense beds of gravel shows same thing). & the plain I think requires same condition. —
At the very head saw square white table land. —
Cliffs on this side of Wood Island. very remarkable:
at first the lower part is generally more crystalline such as. (653). — then comes a sandstone with small pebbles. — Porphyry looking like jasper. — more sandstone. — sandstone sometimes largely conglomerate — (what pebbles?). — Such rocks as (653) pass into red rock. — Above the sandstone, not weak separated chalky bed. — Is it same as high land? —
There are many dykes. one running (compass ENE.). — Do they cut the chalk. — Strata irregular. W by S dip most common. — Does the chalk dip? Proportion of beds? nature of superior table land. ? — Salinia. ? —
Dip? Lower rocks? Has there been two upheavals? . double range of table land, lower 50 or 60 feet above sea. — higher some hundred. & some miles further back.: Dykes
opposite Guanacos Island. Pitchstone occurring under porphyry. —
Guanacos Island iron stone occurring in Porphyry. [sketch]
The porphyry rock is often cavernous, irregularly papform.
These two hills are composed of the laminated porphyry. — The great plain, at the foot of two hills, is generally covered by calcareous (1640) sandy soft sandstone. — sometimes it is not calcareous 91662). — this seems to lie over a sort of clay. salt taste (origin of salt water?) angular decomposition (1663. 1664) which contains layers of fine crystall: gypsum. — it is probable that the oyster beds belong to this plain; although not been on north side.
The South Barranca (I saw. Jan 4th) are horizontally stratified; the clay bed is half the thickness of cliff. — the gravel other half & the cliff about (80 feet) or less than quarter the whole range, high plain, where we have seen Calc. sandstone. — The organic remains, in the bed & the gypsum in upper part show it to be of same age as great St Fe bed. — Area greater size. — Turritella more numerous. — but yet same general feature. — the calc. sandstone appears to be the same as occurs above oyster beds at R Chupat & New Bay. —
On the —
The 2 & 8 [illeg] cliffs
south west of the ship are curious, they are essentially composed of feldspathic rock, but alternate & pass into each other incessantly. —
The common rocks are white hard feldspathic (672. 673. 679.) They generally rest on such as red, hard. porphyry (674). — which occasionally becomes more crystalline as (677). — There are no limits to these alternations & passages. Another perhaps even more abundant rock a common feldspathic rock 1649, where the universal occurrence of very small rounded pebbles proves the action of water. — this is covered by such (674. 647. 1648 red porphyry: jasper porphyry, white [illeg] held. rock 1665 1650). — The
sup more common superior bed is a rock, resembling ferruginous sandstone, but really a soft earthy snow white thick bed with particles of quartz. strikingly resembling calcareous matter. as (1651. 1675). Then the white & red, fine grained, uncrystallized feldspathic rock. —
31 verso [blank]
The colouring matter of the red varieties, often times tinges the white of a delicate pink sometimes in lines. — at other times, in a horizontal section.
in circular patches & parallel bands of white occur in the midst of the red. — V curious drawing on a small scale. —
Following section will illustrate
|Dip NW||Dip NNW|
|1||rock like 1683. without water lines||1683||(like)|
|2||same as 3 but much coarser||1668|
|3||(1651) like mortar||1667|
|4||1674 (like)||1647 (like)|
all same dips
|1667||1647. 1648||1672. 1673||like||1650|
|1668||1649. like||1674 like|
coarser variety with pebbles
|1651||1766. 1765||East entrance|
|(1674. 1649 like)||1767|
|1768||clearly junction mark as in F|
These rocks are traversed by dykes. of which I found three.
1st had even sides, straight & vertical & composed of the same substance as the surrounding mass, which was (1649), the central parts. were tinged red. — must be fissure filled up. —
The two others were vertical, very tortuous & might be traced for long distance. —
it the 2d was composed of rocks such as 1652 & 1672; about a foot thick — I could not perceive it altered the rocks. — it cut curious chemical nature
all the beds, untill impeached the earthy feldspar, like 1651 & others something like 1683. —
3d & thus [ sand] in a NE & SW course an E & W course. — the 3d dyke was composed of rock (1670) with much mica & ran S & N — a small dyke of this nature cut through dyke 2d. —
In one or two places there are conglomerate beds beneath such rocks as 1649. — 1672. 1673. 74, always of a dark red colour. — they are composed of pebbles of a size of sand to that of a mans head. — The pebbles are of highly crystalline porphiries such as do not now exist near here. — They have been deposited in rapid current. from the stratification, general dip of beds same as usual. — From this & such specimens as (1783) with water lines I conclude all these rocks have been formed under water. — If I had only seen a section such as F. I should have thought (1677) had been melted & poured over the inferior rocks. — more especially as the junction is slightly inducted. — Whatever origin of 1679 is It must be the same for all porphiries 1634 -- 39. for where section F is; the cliffs end & great porphyritic formation begins of which (1677) present in external form & nature a good type. — Yet I cannot think rocks such as 1681. which pass into 1675. & such, 1673.,. 1674. which lie over rocks of aqueous origin such rocks as 1673 passing into. 1649 & pass into each other & alternate without marked change can owe their origins to such different causes as Fire & Water.
Section F is interesting, where Porphyry 1677 dips into the sea.
I thought it belonged to the range of hills behind the Fort — it was only at its outcrop. I saw it overlying such rocks as 1678. 1679.) & other coarser varieties with small pebbles such as (1649). — The dip is here W N W. — which is unusual & it is the point of a bite or bay & commencement of the
tw softer rocks. —
The general dip of all the above rocks is NNW. — but not accurately; the stratification is in plains considerably disturbed.
at Dip at about 15°. —
I noticed here the same fact as at the Falklands namely outcrop behind outcrop without anticlinal lines. —
[sketch of anticlinal lines]
Gran 1650 1675
white [illeg] 1681 1650
1674 Red [illeg] 1649
1651 mortar & F.B. 1681
I may notice that form of harbor roughly agrees with stratification. creek running to the S. of W & E. —
In the East of the Fort, where the Spaniards have quarried.. — The following rocks are visible. —
1682 —— to 1691. — which tell something like same tale as section F. viz. that Porphyry (1684) (which is part of same bed with (1690: 1691) & which include the principal varieties in the country. lies over rocks of a very earthy nature, sometimes quite soft. & very commonly lined with horizontal or waving ferruginous lines. as in sandstone, evidently formed in water. —
These 6 rocks occur without any determinate order & pass into each other. —
The passage of Porhyry 1684. is certain. the laminated variety 1691. occurs at top of bed. — which appears to be its common position. — These beds (porphyry) inducted dip to SSE at ∠ 10° (or about). now they rest
on S side of great Porphyry range. behind the Fort. —
This range runs about ENE & WSW or NE & W. which line continued falls to the South of the cliffs. & therefore their northerly dip is explained by line of violence continued, although no actual hills are produced.
The following facts are I think proved by geology of Port Desire viz that earthy & crystalline porphiries were formed, were covered by conglomerates & other mechanical rock; that rocks partaking of both character of mechanical & chemical passed into each other & alternated an argument for the Wernerians; that there was a common deposit of white earthy feldspar: & that the dykes are of curious chemical nature, that the conglomerates are formed from the rolling of porphyries rocks now present.
that these beds were upheaved by the chain of hills north of the Fort. — That this roughly impressed the present form of land. — That in certain places, a great bed of yellowish sandy clay was deposited abounding with large ostreae very generally same fossils. with S Josef & St Fe ∴ contemporaneous.
that the upper parts of this bed was purer clay & contained layers of Gypsum, that above this there is bed of
to earthy sandstone, sometimes generally (same as in R. Chupat near Rios calcareous. — That these beds show no sign of violence. — That after this a most enormous alluvial action removed parts of the lower beds & deposited a vast thickness of rounded porphyry & white quartz pebbles. (if these were two upheavals one took place at this period?) — that the sea remained or this gave time enough to leave shells which now exist, even with their colours. elevated 247 feet above the sea. — Then the land was elevated or sea subsided. — That some this there has been very great alluvial action, more than the present dry climate
can account for. Even if we put out of the case the great removals & immense vallies in the upper plain, where there are little traces of water ever running.
We may instance the creek, which cuts through hard Porphyry rocks, 100 to 200 feet high, nor only a little stream
with which deposits mud. — Leaving about pinnacles & overhanging crags, as a mark of former. — I saw one of the rude precipitatious side ravines, commencing at once, with a cliff 60 or 70 feet high, as in volcanic country.
I think volcanic earthquakes must here have been present, & aided by rapid torrents. — Would not old creeks, where is shown to exist in the harbour, when covered by modern beds yet be the lowest part & account for modern vallies coinciding with old ones. & these, leaving one to suppose present causes had effected them.
when in such a case of this shells with their colour reducing you to a short period, renders it impossible.
[illeg] gravel many
from [2 words illeg] shells rounded from the beach & mud from [illeg] with [illeg] bones.
[illeg] 30 32
.164 in same hours.
4 3/4 7 = 10/4 7 = 19/28 of .164. = .111
28/ 3116 (111)
19 31 16
supposing to conflict or
Porphyry & modern beds
upheave upheaved together (proposing a foot or two this N. plain)
(Superposition of gravel. —)
(Age of bed. calc. sandstone)
2. stratification & dip
1. General origin. — age &c &c
Porphyries up harbor &c
Great modern bed. (Elevation of plain, height &c
Sterility salt water
Vallies &c old system
(Gravel above (Oyster & Porphyries)
Port St. Julian
Nature of gravel [sketch]
(Change in life from gravel
The gravel not very long after the Argilla being then not very darker for clay beds from Oyster being found higher up. — Yet after the deposit of gravel complete change of life. — modern shells inland of Pectens Julian & where
It would appear to be a [Calanote] over the than species on the right & being replaced by other sorts
[Turions] (shells from coast) Patella, Muscles
Return to homepage
Citation: John van Wyhe, editor. 2002-. The Complete Work of Charles Darwin Online. (http://darwin-online.org.uk/)
File last updated 2 July, 2012

American Journal of Physical Anthropology doi:10.1002/ajpa.21350
A mitochondrial revelation of early human migrations to the Tibetan Plateau before and after the last glacial maximum
Zhendong Qin et al.
As the highest plateau surrounded by towering mountain ranges, the Tibetan Plateau was once considered to be one of the last populated areas of modern humans. However, this view has been tremendously changed by archeological, linguistic, and genetic findings in the past 60 years. Nevertheless, the timing and routes of entry of modern humans into the Tibetan Plateau is still unclear. To make these problems clear, we carried out high-resolution mitochondrial-DNA (mtDNA) analyses on 562 Tibeto-Burman inhabitants from nine different regions across the plateau. By examining the mtDNA haplogroup distributions and their principal components, we demonstrated that maternal diversity on the plateau reflects mostly a northern East Asian ancestry. Furthermore, phylogeographic analysis of plateau-specific sublineages based on 31 complete mtDNA sequences revealed two primary components: pre-last glacial maximum (LGM) inhabitants and post-LGM immigrants. Also, the analysis of one major pre-LGM sublineage A10 showed a strong signal of post-LGM population expansion (about 15,000 years ago) and greater diversity in the southern part of the Tibetan Plateau, indicating the southern plateau as a refuge place when climate dramatically changed during LGM.

Date: December 2004
Creator: Habel, Agnieszka
Description: This problem in lieu of thesis is a discussion of two topics: Brownian movement and quantum computers. Brownian movement is a physical phenomenon in which the particle velocity is constantly undergoing random fluctuations. Chapters 2, 3 and 4, describe Brownian motion from three different perspectives. The next four chapters are devoted to the subject of quantum computers, which are the signal of a new era of technology and science combined together. In the first chapter I present to a reader the two topics of my problem in lieu of thesis. In the second chapter I explain the idea of Brownian motion, its interpretation as a stochastic process and I find its distribution function. The next chapter illustrates the probabilistic picture of Brownian motion, where the statistical averages over trajectories are related to the probability distribution function. Chapter 4 shows how to derive the Langevin equation, introduced in chapter 1, using a Hamiltonian picture of a bath with infinite number of harmonic oscillators. The chapter 5 explains how the idea of quantum computers was developed and how step-by-step all the puzzles for the field of quantum computers were created. The next chapter, chapter 6, discus the basic quantum unit of information ...
Contributing Partner: UNT Libraries

Date of this Version
Fathers play an important role in our families. They are role models, protectors, providers, and partners. They can be breadwinners, teachers and mentors. And sadly, sometimes they are also absent due to alcoholism, abandonment or death. How do our fathers influence and shape us? Join us as we explore fatherhood on the next Native America Calling.
This document is currently not available here.

“I think every kid has picked up an interesting rock,” she said. “Have you ever picked up a rock that’s shaped like a heart? That’s shaped like a potato? That’s shaped like a bird? Maybe it had a pretty color or had crystals in it. Just about everybody as a child has collected some kind of rock.”
In this case, treasure has nothing to do with money, unless that includes the money Roberts has invested in her rock hound habit.
She was one of those children who picked up pretty rocks, but her appreciation never went away. Today, she’s president of the North Mississippi Gem and Mineral Society, a group of like-minded people who think good things can be found by looking down.
“We don’t do a lot digging. You’re looking at the surface or just below the surface,” said Roberts, 61, of Counce, Tenn. “A lot of material comes to the surface after a heavy rain. If you’re collecting a day or two after a heavy rain, you need your mud boots on. Mississippi is known for its ooey, gooey clay.”
The society has regular field trips to hunt for new rocks and minerals. In these litigious days, it’s important to get permission from land owners before the searching begins.
Provisions include a rock hammer, shovel and safety glasses, as well as containers to hold fresh finds and a screwdriver to pry things up, Roberts said.
“You’ve got to pack your own lunch and water,” she said. “Some of the places we collect at are old quarries, so there aren’t any facilities. You have to be pretty self- sufficient.”
Society members have loaned some of their finds for an exhibit at the Oren Dunn City Museum in Tupelo’s Ballard Park. The collection includes items on loan from the Mississippi Museum of Natural Science in Jackson.
The “Mississippi’s Geologic History: Written in Stone” exhibit features fossilized sea life from the Mississippian period, which was 323 to 363 million years ago, as well as clay from Monroe County used to make kitty litter. Crystals, geodes and petrified wood also are included. The rare and common rocks, minerals and fossils will be on display until March 23.
Self-described rock hounds come to the hobby in different ways. While Roberts likes to put on her mud boots and hunt for fossils, John Byzet, 65, of Tupelo, has other ways of attaining new rocks.
“I go on some field trips, but not many. Some of it is mail order. Some of it is swap meets. Some of it is friends,” he said. “If I’ve got a friend going to Africa, I say, ‘Pick me up a rock or two.’ I’ve got a friend going to Israel. He’ll pick me up malachite.”
When he gets hold of stones, Byzet likes to cut them into facets to reveal their beauty.
“Mostly it’s amethyst,” he said. “I like that rock. It’s got a nice, purple glimmer to it.”
Byzet got into collecting as a child, when a neighbor introduced him to the hobby. He didn’t know it at the time, but that neighbor and her husband were responsible for a semi-precious stone exhibit at a San Diego museum.
“She gave me my first collection,” Byzet said.
Rocks lost their appeal for Byzet over the years, and he put them away until about three or four years ago, when he saw them again through youthful eyes.
“My grandson was up here and saw some and he drew me back into it. I’ve been enjoying it. I’ve learned a lot. You can’t help but learn if you do it and piddle around,” said Byzet, who maintains the society’s website, www.nmgms.org.
At its monthly meetings at the Lee County Library, the society holds workshops on various aspects of the hobby. There are classes on faceting, as well as tips on how to collect, identify and display collections.
There’s also plenty of plain, old give-and-take between the members, said Robert Langford, 64, a professional geologist from Saltillo.
“I just love geology,” he said, “and it’s a good opportunity to meet with people who have the same interests.”
Like Roberts, Langford focuses on fossils, and that fascination has trickled down to two of his daughters.
“They have their own collections,” he said. “They have a good time collecting fossils.”
The hobby has come full circle for Langford, who was helped and encouraged by his mother when he was a teenager.
“It’s about hunting and finding and trying to figure out what it was,” he said. “From a family standpoint, it’s a great hobby.”
Treasure comes in all shapes and sizes, and people deal with it in different ways. A lot of Langford’s collection is packed away in boxes, while Byzet combines woodworking with rock hounding to create display cases out of black walnut.
“Everybody comes at it their own way,” Roberts said. “That’s what’s great about it.”
There is one commonality society members share. Roberts said that at some point in their lives, “they’ve picked up a rock and said, ‘I wonder if there is someone around who can tell me what this is.’”
The answer is “Yes.”
“If we can’t tell them,” Roberts said, “we know where to steer them.”

GloMax®-Multi Jr Method for DNA Quantitation Using Hoechst 33258
- Comments & Ratings
Quantitation of DNA is an important step for many practices in molecular biology. Common techniques that use DNA, such as sequencing, cDNA synthesis and cloning, RNA transcription, transfection, nucleic acid labeling (e.g., random prime labeling), etc., all benefit from a defined template concentration. Failure to produce results from these techniques sometimes can be attributed to an incorrect estimate of the DNA template used. The concentration of a nucleic acid most commonly is measured by UV absorbance at 260nm (A260). Absorbance methods are limited in sensitivity, however, due to a high level of background interference.

As a policy, Python doesn't run user-specified code on startup of Python programs. (Only interactive sessions execute the script specified in the PYTHONSTARTUP environment variable if it exists).
However, some programs or sites may find it convenient to allow users to have a standard customization file, which gets run when a program requests it. This module implements such a mechanism. A program that wishes to use the mechanism must execute the statement
The user module looks for a file .pythonrc.py in the user's home directory and if it can be opened, executes it (using execfile()) in its own (the module user's) global namespace. Errors during this phase are not caught; that's up to the program that imports the user module, if it wishes. The home directory is assumed to be named by the HOME environment variable; if this is not set, the current directory is used.
The user's .pythonrc.py could conceivably test for
sys.version if it wishes to do different things depending on
the Python version.
A warning to users: be very conservative in what you place in your .pythonrc.py file. Since you don't know which programs will use it, changing the behavior of standard modules or functions is generally not a good idea.
A suggestion for programmers who wish to use this mechanism: a simple
way to let users specify options for your package is to have them
define variables in their .pythonrc.py file that you test in
your module. For example, a module spam that has a verbosity
level can look for a variable
user.spam_verbose, as follows:
import user verbose = bool(getattr(user, "spam_verbose", 0))
(The three-argument form of getattr() is used in case
the user has not defined
spam_verbose in their
Programs with extensive customization needs are better off reading a program-specific customization file.
Programs with security or privacy concerns should not import this module; a user can easily break into a program by placing arbitrary code in the .pythonrc.py file.
Modules for general use should not import this module; it may interfere with the operation of the importing program.

Preterm labor occurs between the 20th and 37th week of pregnancy. This labor includes both uterine contractions and cervical changes.
A full-term pregnancy lasts 38-42 weeks but preterm labor can lead to early delivery. Infants born before 37 weeks are considered premature.
In most cases, the cause is of preterm labor is unknown.
Some preterm labor is associated with preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM). PPROM is the rupture of both the amniotic sac and chorion membranes. It generally occurs at least one hour before labor begins.
The chance of preterm-labor is greatest in women under the 18 years or over 35 years. Other maternal factors that may increase the chance of preterm labor include:
- Low socioeconomic status
- Lack of prenatal care and social support
- Being underweight or obese before becoming pregnant
- Physical, sexual, or emotional abuse
- Severe depression or anxiety
- High blood pressure
- Clotting disorders
- Hormonal imbalance
- Certain medications to treat health problems or exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES)
- Illicit drug use
- Alcohol use
Pregnancy complications that may increase your risk of preterm labor include:
- Placental abruption
- Premature rupture of the membranes
- Carrying more than one baby
- Vaginal bleeding after 16 weeks, or during more than one trimester
- Infection in the cervix, uterus, vagina, or urinary tract including STDs
- Being pregnant with a single fetus after in vitro fertilization (IVF)
- Presence of a retained intrauterine device
- Incompetent cervix
- Too much or too little fluid surrounding the baby
- Surgery on your abdomen during pregnancy
- Amniotic fluid infection
- Intrauterine fetal death
- Intrauterine growth delay
- Birth defects in the baby
Other factors associated with an increased chance of preterm labor include:
- History of one or more spontaneous second-trimester abortions
- Less than six months between giving birth and the beginning of the next pregnancy
- A previous preterm birth
- Uterine fibroids
- Abnormally shaped uterus
Symptoms may include:
- Abdominal pain that feels something like menstrual cramps
- Dull pain in the lower back
- Pressure in the pelvis and tightening in the thighs
- Vaginal bleeding or spotting, or watery discharge
Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and medical history. A physical exam will be done. Your doctor may recommend tests to check your cervix and membranes have ruptured. An ultrasound will help your doctor see internal structures and the baby.
Fluids in the cervix will also be tested for sign of labor progression. A tocometer may be placed to help monitor contractions.
Treatment will depend on your baby's development, especially the growth of the lungs. If your doctor believes the baby is ready, the labor may be allowed to continue. If the baby is not ready to be delivered, your doctor may try to stop the labor. Stopping labor is a complicated process and may not always work. Some treatment options may include:
- Tocolytics—may delay labor for a few days
- Corticosteroids—to help the baby's lungs develop
- Antibiotics—if an infection is suspected or present
To help reduce your chance of preterm labor, take the following steps:
- Get the proper prenatal care throughout your entire pregnancy.
- Eat a healthy, balanced diet with plenty of fruits, vegetables and whole grains.
- Avoid smoking, alcohol, and drugs.
- Keep chronic diseases under control.
- Stay active during your pregnancy. Your doctor can give you exercise guidelines that are right for you.
- If you are at high-risk for premature birth, talk to your doctor about progesterone therapy.
- Reviewer: Andrea Chisholm, MD; Brian Randall, MD
- Review Date: 04/2013 -
- Update Date: 04/23/2013 -

SEV331: Focus Vocational Skills -1hr (2012-2013)
CURRICULUM PROGRAM: Special Education
COURSE TITLE: Focus Vocational Skills -1hr
CALENDAR YEAR: 2012-2013
GRADE LEVEL: 9-12
COURSE LENGTH: 36 weeks
Major Concepts/Content: The Focus Vocational Skills course provides students with the knowledge and skills necessary to identify career options, access community resources, and practice work-related behaviors. The course provides guided "on-the-job" practice in school and community settings for a range of post-secondary careers. The skills necessary for success in the working environment are emphasized to include decision making, problem solving, critical thinking, interpersonal relationships, technology, workplace readiness, and communication.
Major Instructional Activities: Practical application and generalization of course concepts occurs in natural settings such as home, school, and community. Instructional activities include personal and career planning, resume writing, interview skills, investigating personality traits associated with various types of jobs, and completion of interest inventories / forms / applications. Students have multiple opportunities to research various types of jobs, identify necessary income for post-secondary living expenses, research potential income for diverse jobs, and review employment sections of newspaper and Internet. Employer expectations will be emphasized to include decision making and problem solving skills, communication and social skills with supervisors and co-workers, following directions (oral & written), workplace readiness skills, and rights and responsibilities of employees. Work-based strategies appropriate for this course include study trips to community businesses, job shadowing, and service learning. Activities may require the student to be knowledgeable of the use of related technology, tools, and equipment.
Major Evaluative Techniques: Students will be evaluated through informal and formal assessments. Multiple authentic assessments will be used as students perform, produce and demonstrate skills both in the classroom and real life settings. This course may not be mastered in one year and students may earn multiple credits in this course.
Course Objectives: The essential objectives of Focus Vocational Skills are designed to facilitate learning outcomes appropriate to the instructional needs of each student. Instructional activities are based upon real world needs with the goal of increased independence and autonomy in his or her home and community.

Labrador Retriever originated in Newfoundland, Canada. Small water dogs were used to retrieve birds and fish; they even pulled small boats through the water. Their strong desire to work, versatility, and waterproof coats impressed fishermen, one of whom brought a dog back to England with him. Lord Malmsbury saw this dog, then called a St. John’s Dog, and imported several from Newfoundland. Lord Malmsbury is credited with having started to call the dogs Labradors, although the reason is lost to history. Eventually, the English quarantine stopped additional imports from coming into the country, and the Labradors already in England were cross-bred to other retrievers. However, breed fanciers soon put a stop to that, and the breed as we know it today was born.
Labrador Retriever is probably the most popular dog breed in the world.
Labrador Retriever is a medium-sized, strongly built dog breed that retains its hunting and working instincts. Standing between 21.5 and 24.5 inches tall and weighing between 55 and 80 pounds, with females smaller than males, the breed is compact and well-balanced. Labrador Retrievers have short, weather-resistant coats that can be yellow, black, or chocolate. The head is broad, the eyes are friendly, and the tail is otterlike. Grooming a Labrador Retriever is not difficult, although it is amazing how much the coat can shed at times. Shedding is worst in spring and fall when the short, dense undercoat and coarser outer coat lose all the dead hair. Brushing daily during these times will lessen the amount of hair in the house.
Photo: Labrador Retriever puppies – Brown, Black and Yellow.
Labrador Retrievers do everything with vigor. When it’s time to play, they play hard. When it’s time to take a nap, they do that with enthusiasm, too. But this desire to play and instinct to work means that Labs need vigorous exercise every day and a job to do. They need to bring in the newspaper every morning, learn to pick up their toys, and train in obedience. Labrador Retrievers do very well in many canine activities, including agility, flyball, field tests and trials, tracking, search-and-rescue work, and therapy dog work. Labrador Retrievers still enjoy swimming, and if water is available, a swim is a great way to burn off excess energy.
Early socialization and training can teach a Labrador Retriever puppy household rules and social manners. Training should continue throughout puppyhood and into adulthood so that the Labrador Retriever’s mind is kept busy. The Labrador Retriever can learn advanced obedience, tricks, or anything else her owner wishes to teach her.
Labrador Retrievers are great family dogs. They will bark when people approach the house but are not watchdogs or protective. Labrador Retriever puppies are boisterous and rambunctious and need to be taught to be gentle with young children. Older kids will enjoy the Lab’s willingness to play. Most Labrador Retrievers are also good with other dogs and can learn to live with small pets, although interactions should be supervised. Health concerns include hip and elbow dysplasia, knee problems, eye problems, and allergies.
The Labrador Retriever loves to swim. However, as unlikely as it may seem, Labs do not come “out of the box” knowing how to swim. Furthermore, some Labs become truly nervous around water. That having been said, most Labs can be taught to swim quickly and easily, and a few simple lessons can lead to hours of enjoyment for both you and your dog. There are a number of reasons to teach your Lab to swim while he’s still a pup. For one thing, it’s easier on the dog. A large dog has a lot of body weight to manage in the water, and for a dog new to swimming, this can increase the slope of the learning curve. Puppies, because of their small size, have an easier time.
See 7.5 week old Labrador pups go to the water for the first time
Even before you teach your Lab to swim, you can start off on the right foot by building his confidence around water. Take your dog for a walk around the local pond or lake. Encourage any interest that your dog shows in the water with verbal praise. If he is willing to get his feet wet, encourage him to do so and praise him when he does. Simple preliminaries like this lay a strong foundation for you because you teach the dog that there is no reason to fear water. Remember that the primary goal here is to provide positive experiences for your Lab around and in the water. Making sure that the aquatic site you’ve chosen is safe goes a long way towards ensuring such experiences.
Labrador Retriever Videos
Training Labrador Retrievers: Training Labrador puppies is best started around 2 months of age; the same time as the Labrador puppy is weaned from his mother. This life-long commitment is the beginning of a wonderful relationship between owner and dog. Here are some videos from dog training expert Melanie McLeroy to help you get started.
Teach your Labrador to learn and respond to their name.
Teach your Labrador to sit on command.
Teach your Labrador to stay on command.
Teach your Labrador to lie down on command.
Teach your Labrador to heel.
Teach your Labrador to come on command.
Before your Labrador training starts, you have to consider the training method you intend to use. This method needs to be consistent, so making the decision is one that requires some research. Many professional animal trainers use what’s called positive reinforcement (believes that animals are much better behaved and easier to train when they’re earning rewards and praise than if they’re being punished).

Fixing Math Education 2
AKA "Drill-n-Kill" vs "Inquiry Based"
AKA "Traditional" vs "Progressive"
Notice how some terms just naturally sound better than others? Does that have anything to do with the substance of the ideas?
So there's really no general agreement on what constructivism is. Some people argue it's not curriculum or pedagogy, it's brain science. I simply use it to refer to those approaches of teaching mathematics that require students to develop their own mathematics from scratch. It might include "Problem Solving," "Discovery Learning," and "Inquiry-based Learning (IBL)." My apologies to those who will claim that I do violence to their pet definitions here. But there do seem to be two general camps. On the one hand we have those who think students should learn efficient, time-tested methods of solving problems, and learn them to mastery (automation). These I call "traditionalists." On the other hand, we have those who emphasize that students should learn to think creatively, develop strategies to solve novel problems, and develop deep insights into mathematics. These I call "constructivists."
The answer is actually simple. We need both. However, when sacrifices must be made, there is one approach that is essential, and one that is merely desirable. Unfortunately, reasonable people will disagree about which is which. This, however, is my blog, so my opinion is right.
The much-maligned traditional method is essential. We must first realize that there is a great deal of disinformation floating around about the traditional method. Its opponents claim the traditional method teaches rote memorization without understanding or thinking. Except perhaps in some isolated enclaves where stereotypically poor teaching took place, this has never been the case. All the widely used math textbooks of the 19th century, for example, emphasized "mental arithmetic," that is, the ability to think through multiple-step problems "in your head" and give the solution, not only without a calculator but even without a pencil. The kinds of thinking and understanding that were required differed from what is expected today, because the skill set expected of an educated person has changed. So in those days, being able to carry sums in your head was far more important than, say, sketching the graph of an exponential function. In honest debate, we must realize that "Back-to-the-Basics" or "traditional education" does not imply restricting ourselves to the content or objectives of a bygone era.
The primary features of the traditional method include: 1) Understanding a mathematical concept, e.g. "What does it mean to add two numbers?" 2) Memorization of basic facts/definitions/results, e.g. "the Times Tables." 3)Application of memorized knowledge to novel problems and more advanced concepts. 4) Review and maintenance of memorized knowledge.
The traditional method results in efficient learning and provides the foundation necessary for creative thinking, even if it fails to sufficiently address that objective, according to its critics. And yes, even educators from Singapore, whose students smoke the Americans in international tests, are looking with envy at the creativity of some of our students. This demonstrates that a commitment to the essential objectives may not produce all the results that are desirable.
It is well documented in cognitive science that the brain has a limited capacity to manipulate objects in "working memory." It is often said that we cannot process more than seven memory objects at once, which supposedly explains why phone numbers have seven digits (only now they have 10, but that's OK, because the phone remembers all the numbers for us). The working memory is where problem solving and creative activities take place. The working memory can access permanent memory for information it needs. However, any new information that must be taken in to solve a problem must occupy space in the working memory, thus taking away from the space available for creative activity. That is why we quickly become frustrated when trying to follow assembly instructions that include many terms with which we are not familiar. Even if the actual steps in the process are simple, if they involve several terms that are not defined in our permanent memory, those terms require space in our working memory which is then not available for solving the problem. This explains why the pedagogic fad of "learning to learn" is a failure. We do indeed need skills for learning--but such skills are utterly dependent on a reliable bank of information which can be accessed instantly and does not require the use of working memory. The first step in problem solving or creativity must be putting as much relevant information as we can into permanent memory.

A continuation of our predictions of big issues for 2011...
Don’t expect the debates on teaching quality to end anytime soon. We suspect that data from test scores (a la the Los Angeles Times series of 2010) will continue to be used to determine a teacher’s effectiveness in the classroom. Beyond the problems of relying on one strand of data, this approach also reinforces the unfortunate lack of attention given to the early grades, since statewide tests are typically, and appropriately, not administered to children younger than 8 or 9.
This disregard of teacher quality in the early years has led to a sorry state in many schools. A 2007 study published in Science, for example, showed that only 10 percent of poor children experience high-quality instruction throughout their elementary school years. So we applaud the focus on effective teaching in principle. What we wish is that it would go much deeper. Teachers and principals should be assessing the quality of their instruction using research-based tools that feed on most teachers’ desires to improve.
Early childhood programs know this already. Tools like the Classroom Assessment Scoring System (CLASS) are in use throughout the Head Start program and in several state-wide pre-k programs as well. (In fact, they may become a tool for determining which Head Start programs have to re-compete for funds.) These research-based tools use data from minute-by-minute observations of classroom interactions to determine where teachers excel and where they need to change their approach. According to anecdotal reports from teachers in these programs, the observational records are incredibly helpful in honing their craft. Could this be the year for elementary and secondary schools to wake up to the potential of these kinds of tools?
Next Up: Hot Spot #5, Striving Readers and Other Competitions

President Obama’s announcement Friday that his administration will stop deporting eligible undocumented people under the age of 30 is certain to provide fodder for more election-season debates over immigration. Politics aside, however, the new policy will certainly make waves in early learning centers, schools and social services agencies, where children and young parents affected by the new policy are likely to interact with schools and government programs in new ways.
Under the new policy, undocumented residents under 30 will be allowed to reside in the United States if they meet a set of criteria, such as having arrived in the United States before the age of 16 or having either a high school diploma, GED or serving in the military. The policy does not provide a path to citizenship, like many Democrat versions of the DREAM Act have in the past.
Below, three of our biggest questions on what’s to come:
1) Will parents with children in states with strict immigration laws actually feel more protected? Will those states bend to meet the spirit of the federal policy?
The administration is emphasizing that it wants to focus resources on deporting people that pose a “national security or public safety risk,” and less on deporting as many illegal immigrants as possible, regardless of their contributions to society.
But the new policy, which the Associated Press estimates will affect up to 800,000 young people, doesn’t necessarily change the mood in states such as Alabama, where a law passed last year (and currently being challenged by the Obama administration in the 11th circuit U.S. Court of Appeals) requires children to document their immigration status when they enroll in school. Many believe that the law is intimidating families with more than one undocumented member, and even preventing them from sending their children to school — despite the fact that undocumented children have the right to a public education in the U.S.
2) Will the new policy have any effect on families’ enrollment in home visiting programs or on children’s enrollment in child care and pre-K programs? Parents who reside in the United States illegally have been known anecdotally to shy away from enrolling in home visiting programs and/or state-funded pre-K for fear that government officials could find out the immigration status of the family. It’s possible, then, that young immigrant parents in good standing with the government will be more inclined to enroll in such programs in the future.
3) How many parents with young children, illegal or legal, will be affected? Many parents under 30 are now eligible to stay in the United States, but there is a limit to how helpful this will be: For example, under the new policy, an undocumented 8-year old with parents over 30 still risks losing his or her parents due to deportation.
Ensuring that immigrant children grow up without their parents being deported isn’t the explicit goal of the new policy. It’s something to keep in mind, however, as these policies evolve and change in the future. If providing immigrant children with solid education and life opportunities and focusing immigration enforcement on those who pose security and public safety risks is the ultimate goal, then policies that help keep families together while kids are growing up is a logical next step, though it’s unlikely we’ll see much further action on this front until Congress takes up the long-overdue issue of comprehensive immigration reform.
UPDATE 6/19: The Foundation for Child Development (full disclosure: one of our funders) released a report this morning that reiterates why this issue should carry more weight: Children in Immigrant Families provides a detailed assessment of trends in the well-being of the one in four children who are the sons and daughters of immigrants.

Do you ever feel like no matter what you do to get healthier or fit that you don’t seem to succeed? Have you tried every diet out there, only to find the restrictions too difficult to manage? Have you attempted in earnest to maintain a fitness program only to find that, despite your best efforts, doing a consistent routine is too difficult to manage?
With all these starts and stops over years and decades, you may think: What’s the point of trying? Or maybe you’ve given up and resolved to just accept poor health as part of your life. Well, the inability to “stick with it” has many facets, some of which you may not be able to control. In fact, research shows that the self-control needed to succeed in many of these cases may be a limited resource.
In 2006, Michael Inzlicht and colleagues at the University of Toronto Scarborough studied what happens in the brain when humans try to abstain from something they want. That is, when we try to use willpower to refrain from acting on our urges to do something specific.
Failure to control one’s behavior is found in all aspects of life. It includes acting out, saying mean things, stealing and drug abuse. It also encompasses not doing things that are good for you like walking, eating healthy and getting plenty of rest.
Inzlicht set up a study, published in the journal Psychological Science, which tested participants’ self-control over time. Participants were first asked to do something to deplete their “store” of willpower or behavioral control and then see how much they had left for another, unrelated task.
First, participants watched an emotionally upsetting movie and were asked to suppress their emotions and try not to cry during especially difficult scenes. Following this, participants completed what is called a Stroop task. Stroop is a psychological test that measures the reaction time needed to name colors that are printed in a color not associated with the color word. In other words, saying “green” when the word “green” was printed in the color red. This task may seem simple. While this seems simple, if you try it you will see how much self-control it takes not to blurt out the printed color and to have to suppress that urge and replace it with a correct response.
During both the watching of the film and the Stroop task, participants’ brain activity was measured by an EEG (electroencephalography) device. This records the electrical activity on the scalp to measure voltage changes within the brain’s neurons.
What the researchers discovered was intriguing. When participants had to restrain themselves and exert quite a bit of self-control (when not expressing emotions or when trying to say the names of colors), there was an increase of brain activity in the part of the brain’s frontal lobe known as the anterior cingulate cortex. This is the region of the brain involved in autonomic functions, like regulating blood pressure and heart rate, as well as rational cognitive functions, such as reward anticipation, decision-making and emotion.
The interesting finding in this study is that there was less frontal lobe activity with the Stroop task after watching the gut-wrenching film. In other words, when a fair amount of self-control was previously used on one task, the next time it was needed there was less available for use. These findings suggest that people may not have as much willpower or control over their behavior as time progresses and demands are placed on them to exert such control.
It is pretty discouraging to think that the human brain is capable only of providing a strong degree of self-control during a given time period. That might seem to leave most of us with little hope for change. Think about it: If we use self-control to not eat a sticky bun with breakfast and force ourselves to take that morning jog, then we will have less available control over our behavior when it comes to making lunch and dinner choices, or passing on the second round of drinks, or going to the gym or to yoga class. Is it any wonder why so many fail at diets and exercise routines time and time again?
Well, this needn’t be the case and more information has recently been published on this issue. A study again headed by Inzlicht, this time with colleague Brandon Schmeichel of Texas A&M University, appeared in the September issue of the journal Perspectives on Psychological Science. In this further research, Inzlicht now finds that the “limited resource” model of self-control is too narrow and does not explain the exceptions, the times when self-control is in place and one is able to maintain the level necessary to effect positive change by making repeated good choices. It is not a “use it or lose it” situation as previously thought, but more closely tied to motivation, this study shows.
While previous research apparently pointed to a decrease in the amount of willpower available with each passing task requiring some form of self-control, this conclusion may be flawed because of the generic activity used in the studies. In other words, researchers had set up lab situations wherein subjects had no strong motivation influencing their behavior.
The more recent study indicates that mood, personal beliefs, positive reinforcement and motivation play a big role in exerting willpower. Inzlicht and Schmeichel propose that “engaging in self-control by definition, is hard work; it involved deliberation, attention, and vigilance.”
It’s not the case that resisting an extra piece of bacon at breakfast uses up our daily store of willpower, making self-control more difficult later in the day when needed. Rather, it seems that the motivation to exert our willpower later in the day seems less motivating. At that later time, we tend to want to reward ourselves for hard work done.
In the end, as with everything else affecting health and well-being, you can divide your circumstances into things you can do to help reach your goals and things beyond your control.
In the case of self-control, you need long-term behavior modification for success. My experience has shown that trying to restrict too many things is what leads to failure. For example, trying to set new exercise goals, diet routines and sleep patterns all at the same time creates an overwhelming struggle.
Instead, making one change for a few weeks before adding another seems to allow the brain and behaviors to reshape and recondition to the new activity. Repetition over time turns a self-controlled behavior into a habit that then keeps taking place on autopilot. Once the first piece of the healthy behavior is under new control, add the second piece, and so on. In this way, you don’t run out of your willpower stores, you don’t deplete your motivation and you learn new healthier behaviors along the way. Without behavior modification, all programs for change will fail.
Think about times you have tried to make positive changes in your life and have fallen short or failed. Then think about how many things you were trying to control for at that time. Also consider the moments when you were on the path to success but allowed yourself an indulgence for work well done, and that indulgence set you back in your efforts.
If you analyze in light of the research on self-control, you can find the way forward. It reminds me of the old maxim: “Inch by inch, life is a cinch; yard by yard, it’s very hard.” Which leads to another appropriate maxim: “The journey of a thousand miles begins with the first step.”
Slow down your efforts to be healthier into manageable steps, and over time new behaviors will arise that make self-control easier overall and wellness restoration an achievable goal.

You wouldn’t guess that a bit of green slime could do so much. But from from food to fuel, PetroAlgae, Inc. seems to have thought of everything. This Florida-based renewable energy company has developed a technology in which algae and other microorganisms produce fuel to feed cars, animals, and even humans...and say they can do it cheaper than anyone else.
With the addition of a few basic nutrients, algae gather most of their energy from the sun. The result is a protein and carbohydrate-rich slime that can be converted to a variety of products. First, the protein is extracted and processed into animal feed or blended into human food products. PetroAlgae actually lists one of its products as “meal replacer”, conjuring images of our new utopian future in which chewing is obsolete.
After the protein extraction, what remains is a “lipid-carbohydrate mash”. PetroAlgae claims that this material can be sent directly to a petroleum refinery and processed into diesel, gas, or jet fuel without the need to retro-fit any of the refinery’s conventional equipment. Algae cultivation requires very little square-footage relative to conventional crops, can be grown on non-arable land, and consumes up to twice its weight in carbon dioxide as it grows.
In addition to algae, PetroAlgae draws from a large pool of microorganisms including diatoms, cyanobacteria, and micro-angiosperms (tiny flowering plants). While exact species remain unnamed, the company conscientiously notes that they use only species indigenous to the region in which a production facility will be installed. They have already begun licensing their technology to commercial facilities in Asia, and are poised to complete contracts with the U.S. and several European countries this year. Each licensee is promised the potential to produce 1.5 million barrels of transportation fuel per year, or the equivalent of 1.4 billion miles for a single truck. If PetroAlgae’s assertions hold true, the cost of fuel production is essentially paid for by the revenue from food and feed products, meaning that their microbe-derived fuels will remain competitive with fossil fuels, at any price.
PetroAlgae is in the business of licensing its technology rather than building the algae plants itself. It already has deals with algae farms in India and China and is currently working on deals in the U.S., Canada and Europe.
Via BioFuels Digest
written by Fred, July 14, 2009
written by OakleighVermont solargroupies, July 14, 2009
written by Andrew, July 15, 2009
written by Sri Sadika, July 16, 2009
written by Fred, July 31, 2009
|< Prev||Next >|

.NET Type Design Guidelines
|Visual C# Tutorials|
|.NET Framework Tutorials|
.NET Type Design Guidelines
|© 2006 Microsoft Corp.|
|This tutorial—.NET Type Design Guidelines—is from Framework Design Guidelines: Conventions, Idioms, and Patterns for Reusable .NET Libraries, by Krzysztof Cwalina, Brad Abrams. Copyright © 2006 Microsoft Corp.. All rights reserved. This article is reproduced by permission. This tutorial has been edited especially for C# Online.NET. Read the book review!|
(This article was written and annotated by members of the Microsoft Common Language Runtime (CLR) and .NET teams and other experts.)
Type Design Guidelines in .NET
From the CLR perspective, there are only two categories of types—reference types and value types—but for the purpose of framework design discussion we divide types into more logical groups, each with its own specific design rules. Figure 4-1 shows these logical groups.
Classes are the general case of reference types. They make up the bulk of types in the majority of frameworks. Classes owe their popularity to the rich set of object-oriented features they support and to their general applicability. Base classes and abstract classes are special logical groups related to extensibility. Extensibility and base classes are covered in Chapter 6.
Interfaces are types that can be implemented both by reference types and value types. This allows them to serve as roots of polymorphic hierarchies of reference types and value types. In addition, interfaces can be used to simulate multiple inheritance, which is not natively supported by the CLR.
Structs are the general case of value types and should be reserved for small, simple types, similar to language primitives.
Enums are a special case of value types used to define short sets of values, such as days of the week, console colors, and so on.
Static classes are types intended as containers for static members. They are commonly used to provide shortcuts to other operations.
Delegates, exceptions, attributes, arrays, and collections are all special cases of reference types intended for specific uses, and guidelines for their design and usage are discussed elsewhere in this book.
- DO ensure that each type is a well-defined set of related members, not just a random collection of unrelated functionality.
- It is important that a type can be described in one simple sentence. A good definition should also rule out functionality that is only tangentially related.
|If you have ever managed a team of people you know that they don't do well without a crisp set of responsibilities. Well, types work the same way. I have noticed that types without a firm and focused scope tend to be magnets for more random functionality, which, over time, make a small problem a lot worse. It becomes more difficult to justify why the next member with even more random functionality does not belong in the type. As the focus of the members in a type blurs, the developer's ability to predict where to find a given functionality is impaired, and therefore so is productivity.|
|Good types are like good diagrams: What has been omitted is as important to clarity and usability as what has been included. Every additional member you add to a type starts at a net negative value and only by proven usefulness does it go from there to positive. If you add too much in an attempt to make the type more useful to some, you are just as likely to make the type useless to everyone.|
| When I was learning OOP back in the early 1980s, I was taught a mantra that I still honor today: If things get too complicated, make more types. Sometimes, I find that I am thinking really hard trying to define a good set of methods for a type. When I start to feel that I'm spending too much time on this or when things just don't seem to fit together well, I remember my mantra and I define more, smaller types where each type has well-defined functionality. This has worked extremely well for me over the years. On the flip side, sometimes types do end up being dumping grounds for various loosely related functions. The .NET Framework offers several types like this, such as |

Principles of Finance/Section 1/Chapter 6/Corp/WACC
When valuing a new venture by a company, it is necessary to use an appropriate discount rate. However, since corporations can be structured very differently, it is important to reflect that in the respective costs of capital. Let's say there are two similar companies in the same industry. Company A is financed 90% by equity (that is, stock) and 10% by debt (long term corporate bonds). Company B is financed by 25% equity, and 75% debt. These two companies would have to be valued according to their respective risk levels and required returns.
One common way to determine the cost of capital is to use the Weighted Average Cost of Capital, or WACC.
In this formula, V is equal to the value of the firm, or Debt (D) plus Equity (E) Example:
AKL corporation is currently financed with $1,000,000 of 7% bonds, and $2,000,000 of common stock. The stock has a beta of 1.5, and the risk free rate is 4%, and the market risk premium is 3.5%. The marginal tax rate for a corporation of AKL's size is 35%. What is AKL's WACC?
The first thing we must do in this problem is determine the required rate on equity (Re) for AKL. We can plug the Beta given and the risk free rate into the CAPM as follows:
Now, we have all of the necessary information to solve for WACC:
Last modified on 18 July 2009, at 09:23

Benefits of XQuery
The principal benefits of XQuery are:
- Expressiveness - XQuery can query many different data structures and its recursive nature makes it ideal for querying tree and graph structures
- Brevity - XQuery statements are shorter than similar SQL or XSLT programs
- Flexibility - XQuery can query both hierarchical and tabular data
- Consistency - XQuery has a consistent syntax and can be used with other XML standards such as XML Schema datatypes
XQuery is frequently compared with two other languages, SQL and XSLT, but has a number of advantages over these.
Advantages over SQL
Unlike SQL, XQuery returns not just tables but arbitrary tree structures. This allows XQuery to directly create XHTML structures that can be used in web pages. XQuery is for XML-based object databases, and object databases are much more flexible and powerful than databases which store in purely tabular format.
Unlike XSLT, XQuery can be learned by anyone familiar with SQL. Many of the constructs are very similar such as:
- Ordering Results: Both XQuery and SQL add an
order byclause to the query.
- Selecting Distinct Values: Both XQuery and SQL have easy ways to select distinct values from a result set
- Restricting Rows: Both XQuery and SQL have a WHERE X=Y clause that can be added to an XQuery
Another big advantage is that XQuery is essentially the native query language of the World Wide Web. One can query actual web pages with XQuery, but not SQL. Even if one uses SQL-based databases to store HTML/XHTML pages or fragments of such pages, one will miss many of the advantages of XQuery's simple tag/attribute search (which is akin to searching for column names within column names).
Advantages over XSLT
Unlike XSLT, XQuery can be quickly learned by anyone familiar with SQL. XSLT has many patterns that are unfamiliar to many procedural software developers. Also, whereas XSLT is good for using as a static means to convert one type of document to another, for example RSS to HTML, XQuery is a much more dynamic querying tool, useful for pulling out sections of data from large documents and/or large number of documents.
The Debate about XQuery vs. XSLT for Document Transformation
There has been a debate of sorts about the merits of the two languages for transforming XML: XSLT and XQuery. A common misconception is that "XQuery is best for querying or selecting XML, and XSLT is best for transforming it." In reality, both methods are capable of transforming XML. Despite XSLT's longer history and larger install base, the "XQuery typeswitch" method of transforming XML provides numerous advantages.
Most people who need to transform XML hear that they need to learn a language called XSLT. XSLT, whose first version was published by the W3C in 1999, was a huge innovation for its time and, indeed, remains dominant. It was one of the very first languages dedicated to transforming XML documents, and it was the first domain-specific language (DSL) to use advanced theories from the world of functional programming to create very reliable, side-effect free transformations. Many XML developers still feel strong indebted to this groundbreaking language, since it helped them see a new model of software development: one focused around the transformation of models and empowering them to fuse both the requirements and documentation of a transformation routing into a single, modular program.
On the other hand, learning XSLT requires overcoming a very substantial learning curve. XSLT's difficulty is due, in part, to one of the key design decisions by its architects: to express the transformation rules using XML itself, rather than creating a brand new syntax and grammar for storing the transformation rules. XSLT's unique approach to transformation rules also contributes to the steepness of the learning curve. The learning curve can be overcome, but it is fair to say that this learning curve has created a opening for an alternative approach.
XQuery has filled this demand for an alternative among a growing community of users: they find XQuery has a lower learning curve, it meets their needs for transforming XML, and, together with XQuery's other advantages, it has become a compelling "all-in-one" language. Like XSLT, XQuery was created by the W3C to handle XML. But instead of expressing the language in XML syntax, the architects of XQuery chose a new syntax that would be more familiar to users of server-side scripting languages such as PHP, Perl, or Python. XQuery was designed to be similar to users of relational database query languages such as SQL, while still remaining true to functional programming practices. Despite its relative youth (XQuery 1.0 was only released in 2007 when XSLT had already reached its version 2.0), XQuery was born remarkably mature. XML servers like eXist-db and MarkLogic were already using XQuery as their language for querying XML and performing web server operations (obviating the need for learning PHP, Perl, or Python).
So, in the face of the XSLT community's contention that "XSLT is best for transforming documents and XQuery is best for querying databases", this community of users was surprised to find that XQuery has entirely replaced their need for XSLT. They have come to argue unabashedly that they prefer XQuery for this purpose.
How does XQuery accomplish the task of transforming XML? The primary technique in XQuery for transforming XML is a little-known expression added by the authors of XQuery, called "typeswitch." Although it is quite simple, typeswitch enables XQuery to perform nearly the full set of transformations that XSLT does. A typeswitch expression quickly looks at a node's type, and depending on the node's type, performs the operation you specify for that type of node. What this means is that each distinct element of a document can have its own rule, and these rules can be stored in modular XQuery functions. This humble addition to the XQuery language allows developers to transform documents with complex content and unpredictable order - something commonly believed to be best reserved for the domain of XSLT. Despite the differences in syntax and approach to transformation, a growing community has actually come to see the XQuery typeswitch expression as a valid, even superior, way to store their document transformation logic.
By structuring a set of XQuery functions around the typeswitch expression, you can achieve the same result as XSLT-style transforms while retaining the benefits of XQuery: ease of learning and integration with native XML databases. Even more important for those users of native XML databases, the availability of typeswitch means that they only need to learn a single language for their database queries, web server operations, and document transformations. These XQuery typeswitch routines have proved easy to build, test, and maintain - some believe easier than XSLT. XQuery typeswitch has given these users a high degree of agility, allowing them to master XQuery fully rather than splitting their time and attention between XQuery and XSLT.
That said, there is still a large body of legacy XSLT transforms that work well, and there are XSLT developers who see little benefit from transitioning to a typeswitch-style XQuery. Both are valid approaches to document transformation. A natural tension has arisen between the proponents of XQuery typeswitch and XSLT, each promoting what they are most comfortable with and believe to be superior. In practice you might be best served by trying both techniques and determining what style is right for you and your organization. Without presuming a background or interest in XSLT, this article and its companion article help you to understand the key patterns for using XQuery typeswitch for your XML transformation needs.

|Ban Chao's names:|
|Given name||Style name|
|Pinyin||Bān Chāo||Zhòng Shēng|
|Wade-Giles||Pan Ch'ao||Chung Sheng|
Ban Chao (Chinese: 班超; Wade-Giles: Pan Ch'ao, 32–102 CE), courtesy name Zhongsheng (仲 升), was born in Xianyang, Shaanxi, and the younger brother of the famous historian, Ban Gu (Chinese: 班固; Wade–Giles: Pan Ku, (32–92 CE) who, with his father Ban Biao, and sister, Ban Zhao, wrote the famous Hanshu, or 'History of the Former Han Dynasty'.
Ban Chao was a general and cavalry commander in charge of the administration of the "Western Regions" (Central Asia) during the Eastern Han dynasty. He repelled the Xiongnu and secured Chinese control over the Tarim Basin region, and was awarded the title of 'Protector General of the Western Regions'. He fought for 31 years.
Control of the Tarim Basin 
Ban Chao, like his predecessors Huo Qubing and Wei Qing from the Former Han Dynasty before him, was effective at expelling the Xiongnu from the Tarim Basin, and brought the various people of the Western Regions under Chinese rule during the second half of the 1st century CE, helping to open and secure the trade routes to the west. He was generally outnumbered, but skillfully played on the divisions among his opponents. The kingdoms of Loulan, Khotan and Kashgar came under Chinese rule.
Ban Chao was recalled to Luoyang, but then sent again to the Western Region area four years later, during the reign of the new emperor Han Zhangdi. He obtained the military help of the Kushan Empire in 84 in repelling the Kangju who were trying to support the rebellion of the king of Kashgar, and the next year in his attack on Turpan, in the eastern Tarim Basin. Ban Chao ultimately brought the whole of the Tarim Basin under Chinese control.
In recognition for their support to the Chinese, the Kushans (referred to as Da Yuezhi in Chinese sources) requested, but were denied, a Han princess, even though they had sent presents to the Chinese court. In retaliation, they marched on Ban Chao in 90 CE with a force of 70,000, but, exhausted by the expedition, were finally turned back by the smaller Chinese force. The Yuezhi retreated and paid tribute to the Chinese Empire. (Later, during the Yuanchu period, 114-120 CE, the Kushans sent a military force to install Chenpan, who had been a hostage among them, as king of Kashgar).
In 91 CE, Ban Chao finally succeeded in pacifying the Western Regions and was awarded the title of Protector General and stationed at Qiuci (Kucha). A Wuji Colonel was re-established and, commanding five hundred soldiers, stationed in the Kingdom of Nearer Jushi, within the walls of Gaochang, 29 kilometres southeast of Turfan. In 94 CE, Chao proceeded to again attack and defeat Yanqi [Karashahr]. Subsequently, more than fifty kingdoms presented hostages, and submitted to the Interior.
In 97 CE Ban Chao sent an envoy, Gan Ying, who reached the Persian Gulf and left the first recorded Chinese account of Europe. Some modern authors have even claimed that Ban Chao advanced to the Caspian Sea, however, this interpretation has been criticized as a misreading.
In 102 CE Ban Chao was retired as Protector General of the Western Regions due to age and ill health, and returned to the capital Luoyang at the age of 70, but the following month died there in the 9th month of the 14th Yongyuan year (30th Sept. to 28th Oct., 102). See: Hou Hanshu, chap 77 (sometimes given as chap. 107). Following his death, the power of the Xiongnu in the Western Territories increased again, and subsequent Chinese emperors were never to reach so far to the west.
A family of historians 
Ban Chao also belonged to a family of historians. His father was Ban Biao (3-54 CE) who started the History of the Western Han Dynasty (Hanshu; The Book of Han) in 36, which was completed by his son Ban Gu (32-92) and his daughter Ban Zhao (Ban Chao's brother and sister). Ban Chao was probably the key source for the cultural and socio-economic data on the Western Regions contained in the Hanshu.
Ban Chao's youngest son Ban Yong (班勇 Bān Yŏng) participated in military campaigns with his father and continued to have a central military role in the Tarim Basin into the 120s.
Ban Chao's family 
- Ban Biao (班彪; 3-54; father)
Famous quotes 
- "If you don't enter the tiger's den, how can you catch the tiger's cub?" (不入虎穴，不得虎子)
- "Clear water can not harbor big fish, clean politics (or strict enforcement of regulations) can not foster harmony among the general public" (水清無大魚，察政不得下和)
Ban Chao in idioms 
- See four-character idiom:
- "Throw away your writing brush and join the military!" (投筆從戎) based on his words "A brave man has no other plan but to follow Fu and Zhang Qian's footsteps and do something and become somebody in a foreign land. How can I waste my life on writing? (大丈夫無他志略，猶當效傅介子、張騫立功異域，以取封侯，安能久事筆硯間乎？) in Hou Hanshu.
- "Clear water harbors no fish." (水清無魚)
Ban Chao of today 
See also 
- Hill (2009), p. 43.
- Hill (2009), p. 5.
- Hill (2009), p. 5.
- Hill (2009), p. 5.
- Hill. (2009), p. 55.
- J. Oliver Thomson, A History of Ancient Geography, Cambridge 1948, p.311. Thomson cites Richthofen, China, 1877, I, 469 and some other authors in support of the claim that Ban Chao marched to the Caspian, and Yule/Cordier, Cathay and the way thither, 1916 p.40 (p.40f in vol.I of the 2005 edition by Asian Educational Services), Chavannes, Seidenstrassen, p.8, and Teggart, Rome and China as references for such claims being erroneous.
- Chavannes (1906), p. 243.
- Hill (2009), p. xv.
- Chavannes, Édouard (1906). "Trois Généraux Chinois de la dynastie des Han Orientaux. Pan Tch’ao (32-102 p.C.); – son fils Pan Yong; – Leang K’in (112 p.C.). Chapitre LXXVII du Heou Han chou." T’oung pao 7, pp. 210-269.
- Hill, John E. (2009). Through the Jade Gate to Rome: A Study of the Silk Routes during the Later Han Dynasty, First to Second Centuries CE. BookSurge. ISBN 978-1-4392-2134-1.
- The Tarim Mummies. J.P. Mallory and Victor H. Mair (2000). Thames & Hudson. ISBN 0-500-05101-1

In statistics, a confidence region is a multi-dimensional generalization of a confidence interval. It is a set of points in an n-dimensional space, often represented as an ellipsoid around a point which is an estimated solution to a problem, although other shapes can occur.
The confidence region is calculated in such a way that if a set of measurements were repeated many times and a confidence region calculated in the same way on each set of measurements, then a certain percentage of the time, on average, (e.g. 95%) the confidence region would include the point representing the "true" values of the set of variables being estimated. However, unless certain assumptions about prior probabilities are made, it does not mean, when one confidence region has been calculated, that there is a 95% probability that the "true" values lie inside the region, since we do not assume any particular probability distribution of the "true" values and we may or may not have other information about where they are likely to lie.
The case of independent, identically normally-distributed errors 
Suppose we have found a solution to the following overdetermined problem:
where Y is an n-dimensional column vector containing observed values, X is an n-by-p matrix which can represent a physical model and which is assumed to be known exactly, is a column vector containing the p parameters which are to be estimated, and is an n-dimensional column vector of errors which are assumed to be independently distributed with normal distributions with zero mean and each having the same unknown variance .
A joint 100(1 - ) % confidence region for the elements of is represented by the set of values of the vector b which satisfy the following inequality:
where the variable b represents any point in the confidence region, p is the number of parameters, i.e. number of elements of the vector and s2 is an unbiased estimate of equal to
The above inequality defines an ellipsoidal region in the p-dimensional Cartesian parameter space Rp. The centre of the ellipsoid is at the solution . According to Press et al., it's easier to plot the ellipsoid after doing singular value decomposition. The lengths of the axes of the ellipsoid are proportional to the reciprocals of the values on the diagonals of the diagonal matrix, and the directions of these axes are given by the rows of the 3rd matrix of the decomposition.
Weighted and generalised least squares 
Now let us consider the more general case where some distinct elements of have known nonzero covariance (in other words, the errors in the observations are not independently distributed), and/or the standard deviations of the errors are not all equal. Suppose the covariance matrix of is , where V is an n-by-n nonsingular matrix which was equal to in the more specific case handled in the previous section, (where I is the identity matrix,) but here is allowed to have nonzero off-diagonal elements representing the covariance of pairs of individual observations, as well as not necessarily having all the diagonal elements equal.
It is possible to find a nonsingular symmetric matrix P such that
In effect, P is a square root of the covariance matrix V.
The least-squares problem
can then be transformed by left-multiplying each term by the inverse of P, forming the new problem formulation
A joint confidence region for the parameters, i.e. for the elements of , is then bounded by the ellipsoid given by:
Nonlinear problems 
Confidence regions can be defined for any probability distribution. The experimenter can choose the significance level and the shape of the region, and then the size of the region is determined by the probability distribution. A natural choice is to use as a boundary a set of points with constant (chi-squared) values.
One approach is to use a linear approximation to the nonlinear model, which may be a close approximation in the vicinity of the solution, and then apply the analysis for a linear problem to find an approximate confidence region. This may be a reasonable approach if the confidence region is not very large and the second derivatives of the model are also not very large.
See Uncertainty Quantification#Methodologies for forward uncertainty propagation for related concepts.
See also 
- Draper and Smith (1981, p. 94)
- Draper and Smith (1981, p. 108)
- Draper and Smith (1981, p. 109)
||This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. (September 2011)|
- Draper, N.R.; H. Smith (1981) . Applied Regression Analysis (2nd ed.). USA: John Wiley and Sons Ltd. ISBN 0-471-02995-5.
- Press, W.H.; S.A. Teukolsky, W.T. Vetterling, B.P. Flannery (1992) . Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientific Computing (2nd ed.). Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.

Father Christmas is the name used in many English-speaking countries outside the United States and Canada for a figure associated with Christmas. A similar figure with the same name (in other languages) exists in several other countries, including France (Père Noël), Spain (Papá Noel, Padre Noel), Russia (Ded Moroz, Grandfather Frost), almost all Hispanic South America (Papá Noel), Brazil (Papai Noel), Portugal (Pai Natal), Italy (Babbo Natale), Armenia (Dzmer Papik), India (Christmas Father), Andorra (Pare Noel), Romania (Moş Crăciun) and Turkey (Noel Baba).
In England the earliest known personification of Christmas does not describe him as old, or refer to him as 'father'. A carol attributed to Richard Smart, Rector of Plymtree from 1435 to 1477, takes the form of a sung dialogue between a choir and a figure representing Christmas, variously addressed as “Nowell”, “Sir Christemas” and “my lord Christemas”. He does not distribute presents to children but is associated with adult celebrations. Giving news of Christ’s birth, Christmas encourages everyone to eat and drink: "Buvez bien par toute la campagnie,/Make good cheer and be right merry." However, the specific depiction of Christmas as a merry old man emerged in the early 17th century. The rise of puritanism had led to increasing condemnation of the traditions handed down from pre-Reformation times, especially communal feasting and drinking. As debate intensified, those writing in support of the traditional celebrations often personified Christmas as a venerable, kindly old gentleman, given to good cheer but not excess. They referred to this personification as "Christmas", "Old Christmas" or "Father Christmas".
Ben Jonson in Christmas his Masque, dating from December 1616, notes the rising tendency to disparage the traditional forms of celebration. His character 'Christmas' therefore appears in outdated fashions, "attir'd in round Hose, long Stockings, a close Doublet, a high crownd Hat with a Broach, a long thin beard, a Truncheon, little Ruffes, white shoes, his Scarffes, and Garters tyed crosse", and announces "Why Gentlemen, doe you know what you doe? ha! would you ha'kept me out? Christmas, old Christmas?" Later, in a masque by Thomas Nabbes, The Springs Glorie produced in 1638, "Christmas" appears as "an old reverend gentleman in furred gown and cap".
During the mid-17th century, the debate about the celebration of Christmas became politically charged, with Royalists adopting a pro-Christmas stance and radical puritans striving to ban the festival entirely. Early in 1646 an anonymous satirical author wrote The Arraignment, Conviction and Imprisoning of Christmas, in which a Royalist lady is frantically searching for Father Christmas: this was followed months later by the Royalist poet John Taylor's The Complaint of Christmas, in which Father Christmas mournfully visits puritan towns but sees "...no sign or token of any Holy Day". A book dating from the time of the Commonwealth, The Vindication of CHRISTMAS or, His Twelve Yeares' Observations upon the Times (London, 1652), involved "Old Christmas" advocating a merry, alcoholic Christmas and casting aspersions on the charitable motives of the ruling Puritans. In a similar vein, a humorous pamphlet of 1686 by Josiah King presents Father Christmas as the personification of festive traditions pre-dating the puritan commonwealth. He is described as an elderly gentleman of cheerful appearance, "who when he came look't so smug and pleasant, his cherry cheeks appeared through his thin milk white locks, like (b)lushing Roses vail'd with snow white Tiffany". His character is associated with feasting, hospitality and generosity to the poor rather than the giving of gifts.
This tradition continued into the following centuries, with "Old Father Christmas" being evoked in 1734 in the pamphlet Round About Our Coal Fire, as "Shewing what Hospitality was in former Times, and how little of it there remains at present", a rebuke to "stingy" gentry. A writer in "Time's Telescope" (1822) states that in Yorkshire at eight o'clock on Christmas Eve the bells greet "Old Father Christmas" with a merry peal, the children parade the streets with drums, trumpets, bells, (or in their absence, with the poker and shovel, taken from their humble cottage fire), the yule candle is lighted, and; "High on the cheerful fire. Is blazing seen th' enormous Christmas brand." A letter to The Times in 1825, warning against poultry-dealers dishonestly selling off sub-standard geese at Christmas time, is jokingly signed "Father Christmas".
In these early references, Father Christmas, although invariably an old and cheerful man, is mainly associated with adult feasting and drinking rather than the giving of presents. Since the mid-Victorian era however, Father Christmas has gradually merged with the pre-modern gift-giver St Nicholas (Dutch Sinterklaas, hence Santa Claus) and associated folklore. Nowadays in Britain the figure is often called Santa Claus but also often referred to as Father Christmas: the two names are synonyms. In Europe, the figure is usually translated as Father Christmas (Père Noël, Papá Noel, Padre Noel, etc.) rather than "Santa Claus" and is often said to reside in the mountains of Korvatunturi in Lapland Province, Finland.
Current folklore 
Father Christmas often appears as a large man, often around seventy years old. He is dressed in a red suit trimmed with white fur, often girdled with a wide black belt, a matching hat, often long and floppy in nature, and dark boots. Often he carries a large brown sack filled with toys on his back (rarely, images of him have a beard but with no moustache). Urban myth has it that the red suit only appeared after the Coca Cola company started an advertising campaign depicting a red suited Father Christmas in the 1930s. However, the red suit was used long before, including by American illustrator Thomas Nast.
Father Christmas comes down the chimney to put presents under the Christmas tree or in children's rooms, in their stockings. Some families leave a glass of sherry or mulled wine, mince pies, biscuits, or chocolate and a carrot for his reindeer near the stocking(s) as a present for him. In modern homes without chimneys he uses alternative means to enter the home. In some homes children write Christmas lists (of wished-for presents) and send them up the chimney or post them. He is often said to live at the North Pole.
In fiction 
Father Christmas appears in many English-language works of fiction, including J. R. R. Tolkien's Father Christmas Letters (written between 1920 and 1942, first published in 1976), the translation from the French of Jean de Brunhoff's Babar and Father Christmas (originally Babar et le père Noël, 1941), C. S. Lewis's The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe (1950), Raymond Briggs's Father Christmas (1973), Debbie Macomber's There's Something About Christmas (2005), Robin Jones Gunn's Father Christmas Series (2007), Catherine Spencer's A Christmas to Remember (2007), and Richard Paul Evans's The Gift (2007).
In music 
- In 1977, The Kinks recorded the song "Father Christmas".
- In addition, in 1974, Greg Lake (of Emerson, Lake & Palmer) wrote and recorded the song, "I Believe In Father Christmas", which was released as a single in 1975.
- In their 1997 album Pop, U2 cites Father Christmas in the song "If God Will Send His Angels".
See also 
- J. Simpson and S. Roud, The Oxford Dictionary of English Folklore, Oxford, 2001, pp. 119-20
- Although an earlier Elizabethan play by satirist Thomas Nashe, Summer's Last Will and Testament (1592), includes a character personifying Christmas, he is atypically presented as a stingy nobleman who shuns festivity. Nashe is satirising wealthy Elizabethan gentry who avoid their traditional duty of feasting the poor at Christmastime.The play text online at Gutenberg.org
- At the time "Father" was a title sometimes given to older men worthy of respect: "...A respectful title given to an old and venerable man..." "father, n.". OED Online. December 2012. Oxford University Press. 30 December 2012 <http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/68498?rskey=kF677t&result=1>
- "Christmas, His Masque - Ben Jonson". Hymnsandcarolsofchristmas.com. Retrieved 2012-10-23.
- Jean Macintyre (1992). Costumes and Scripts in Elizabethan Theatres. University of Alberta Press. p. 230.
- Nabbes, Thomas, The Works of Thomas Nabbes, Benjamin Blom, Inc, New York, 1968 available online at Google Books 
- J.A.R.Pimlott (1960). History Today 10 (12). http://www.historytoday.com/jar-pimlott/christmas-under-puritans
- "A Christmassy post | Mercurius Politicus". Mercuriuspoliticus.wordpress.com. 2008-12-21. Retrieved 2011-04-01.
- The Examination and Tryal of Father Christmas"
- Round About Our Coal Fire, or Christmas Entertainments. J.Roberts. 1734.
- Dawson, William Francis (2007). The Project Gutenberg eBook, Christmas: Its Origin and Associations Project Gutenburg
- FATHER CHRISTMAS, "Christmas Geese", The Times (London, England) dated 24 December 1825, page 4. from The Times Digital Archive, accessed 22 December 2012.
- Diarist Barclay Fox refers to a children's party given on 26 December 1842 featuring 'venerable effigies' of Father Christmas and the Old Year; '...Father Christmas with scarlet coat and cocked hat, stuck all over with presents for the guests...' R. L. Brett, ed., Barclay Fox's Journal, Bell and Hyman, London, 1979
- "BBC - Father Christmas, green or red?". BBC News. 4 December 2009. Retrieved 2011-04-01.
- Coke denies claims it bottled familiar Santa image, Jim Auchmutey, Rocky Mountain News, December 10, 2007.
- "Santa's arrival lights up the Green".
- Christmas in America - A History By Penne L. Restad.

|Time period||c. 400–?|
[a] The Semitic origin of the Brahmic scripts is not universally agreed upon.Note: This page may contain IPA phonetic symbols.
The Gupta script (sometimes referred to as Gupta Brahmi Script or Late Brahmi Script ) was used for writing Sanskrit and is associated with the Gupta Empire of India which was a period of material prosperity and great religious and scientific developments. The Gupta script was descended from Brahmi and gave rise to the Nagari, Sharada and Siddham scripts. These scripts in turn gave rise to many of the most important scripts of India, including Devanagari (the most common script used for writing Sanskrit since the 19th century), the Gurmukhi script for Punjabi Language and the Tibetan script.
Origins and Classification 
The Gupta Script was descended from the Ashokan Brahmi script, and is a crucial link between Brahmi and most other scripts in the Brahmic family of Scripts, a family of alphasyllabaries or abugidas. This means that while only consonantal phonemes have distinct symbols, vowels are marked by diacritics, with /a/ being the implied pronunciation when the diacritic is not present. In fact, the Gupta script works in exactly the same manner as its predecessor and successors, and only the shapes and forms of the graphemes and diacritics are different.
Through the 4th century, letters began to take more cursive and symmetric forms, as a result of the desire to write more quickly and aesthetically. This also meant that the script became more differentiated throughout the Empire, with regional variations which have been broadly classified into three, four or five categories; however, a definitive classification is not clear, because even on a single inscription, there may be variation in how a particular symbol is written. In this sense, the term Gupta script should be taken to mean any form of writing derived from the Gupta period, even though there may be a lack of uniformity in the scripts.
The surviving inscriptions of the Gupta script are mostly found on iron or stone pillars, and on gold coins from the Gupta Dynasty. One of the most important was the Allahabad Prasasti. Composed by Harishena, the court poet and minister of Samudragupta, it describes Samudragupta’s reign, beginning from his ascension to the throne as the second king of the Gupta Dynasty and including his conquest of other kings.
Gupta Numismatics 
The study of Gupta coins began with the discovery of a hoard of gold coins in 1783. Many other such hoards have since been discovered, the most important being the Bayana hoard, discovered in 1946, which contained more than 2000 gold coins issued by the Gupta Kings. Many of the Gupta Empire’s coins bear inscriptions of legends or mark historic events. In fact, it was one of the first Indian Empires to do so, probably as a result of its unprecedented prosperity. Almost every Gupta king issued coins, beginning with its first king, Chandragupta I.
The scripts on the coin are also of a different nature compared to scripts on pillars, due to conservatism regarding the coins that were to be accepted as currency, which would have prevented regional variations in the script from manifesting on the coinage. Moreover, space was more limited especially on their silver coins, and thus many of the symbols are truncated or stunted. An example is the symbol for /ta/ and /na/, which were often simplified to vertical strokes.
- (Spanish) The Gupta Alphabet
- AncientScripts.com entry on the Gupta Script
- The Shivlee Collection of Coins from the Gupta Dynasty In particular, note the limited space on the silver coins
- An eastern variety of the post-Gupta script: Akṣara List of theManuscripts of the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā and Buddhapālita's Commentary, c. the 550-650, Collection of Sanskrit Mss. Formerly Preserved in the China Ethnic Library
- Sharma, Ram. 'Brahmi Script' . Delhi: BR Publishing Corp, 2002
- Srivastava, Anupama. 'The Development of Imperial Gupta Brahmi Script' . New Delhi: Ramanand, 1998
- Fischer, Steven Roger. 'A History of Writing' . UK: Reaktion, 2004
- Bajpai, KD. 'Indian Numismatic Studies. ' New Delhi: Abhinav Publications 2004
- Carl Faulmann (1835–1894), Das Buch der Schrift, Druck und Verlag der Kaiserlichen Hof-und Staatsdruckerei, 1880

Hundred Years' War (1369–89)
||This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. (May 2012)|
|Hundred Years' War (1369-1389)|
|Part of Hundred Years' War|
The Battle of Najera
| Kingdom of France
Crown of Castile
|Kingdom of England|
|Commanders and leaders|
| Charles V of France
Charles VI of France
| Edward III of England
Richard II of England
|Casualties and losses|
The Caroline War was the second phase of the Hundred Years' War between France and England, following the Edwardian War. It was so-named after Charles V of France, who resumed the war after the Treaty of Brétigny (signed 1360). In May 1369, the Black Prince, son of Edward III of England, refused an illegal summons from the French king demanding he come to Paris and Charles responded by declaring war. He immediately set out to reverse the territorial losses imposed at Brétigny and he was largely successful in his lifetime. His successor, Charles VI, made peace with the son of the Black Prince, Richard II, in 1389. This truce was extended many times until the war was resumed in 1415.
The reign of Charles V saw the English steadily pushed back. Although the English-backed claimant to the Duchy of Brittany, John of Montfort, defeated and killed the French claimant, Charles of Blois, at the Battle of Auray in 1364, John and his heirs eventually reconciled with the French kings. The War of the Breton Succession ended in favour of the English, but gave them no great advantage. In fact, the French received the benefit of improved generalship in the person of the Breton commander Bertrand du Guesclin, who, leaving Brittany, entered the service of Charles and became one of his most successful generals.
At about the same time, a war in Spain occupied the Black Prince's efforts from 1366. The Castilian Civil War pitted Pedro the Cruel, whose daughters Constance and Isabella were married to the Black Prince's brothers John of Gaunt and Edmund of Langley, against Henry of Trastámara. In 1369, with the support of Du Guesclin, Henry deposed Pedro to become Henry II of Castile. He then went to war with England, which was allied with Portugal.
Twenty years of war 
Just before New Year's Day 1370, the English seneschal of Poitou, John Chandos, was killed at the bridge at Lussac-les-Châteaux. The loss of this commander was a significant blow to the English. Jean III de Grailly, the captal de Buch, was also captured and locked up by Charles, who did not feel bound by "outdated" chivalry. Du Guesclin continued a series of careful campaigns, avoiding major English field forces, but capturing town after town, including Poitiers in 1372 and Bergerac in 1377. Du Guesclin, who according to chronicler Jean Froissart, had advised the French king not to engage the English in the field, was successful in these Fabian tactics, though in the only two major battles in which he fought, Auray (1364) and Nájera (1367), he was on the losing side and was captured but released for ransom. The English response to Du Guesclin was to launch a series of destructive military expeditions, called chevauchées, in an effort at total war to destroy the countryside and the productivity of the land. But Du Guesclin refused to be drawn into open battle. He continued his successful command of the French armies until his death in 1380.
In 1372, English dominance at sea, which had been upheld since the Battle of Sluys, was reversed, at least in the Bay of Biscay, by the disastrous defeat by a joint Franco-Castilian fleet at the Battle of La Rochelle. This defeat undermined English seaborne trade and supplies and threatened their Gascon possessions.
In 1376, the Black Prince died, and in April 1377, Edward III of England sent his Chancellor, Adam Houghton, to negotiate for peace with Charles, but when in June Edward himself died, Houghton was called home. The underaged Richard of Bordeaux succeeded to the throne of England. It was not until Richard had been deposed by his cousin Henry Bolingbroke that the English, under the House of Lancaster, could forcefully revive their claim to the French throne. The war nonetheless continued until the first of a series of truces was signed in 1389.
Charles V died in September 1380 and was succeeded by his underage son, Charles VI, who was placed under the joint regency of his three uncles. On his deathbed Charles V repealed the royal taxation necessary to fund the war effort. As the regents attempted to reimpose the taxation a popular revolt known as the Harelle broke out in Rouen. As tax collectors arrived at other French cities the revolt spread and violence broke out in Paris and most of France's other northern cities. The regency was forced to repeal the taxes to calm the situation.
See also 
- Ormrod, W., (2002). Edward III. History Today. Vol. 52(6), 20 pgs.
- Ayton, A., (1992). War and the English Gentry under Edward III. History Today. Vol. 42(3), 17 pgs.
- Harari, Y., (2000). Stategy and Supply in Fourteenth Century Western European Invasion *Campaigns. Journal of Military History. Vol. 64(2), 37 pgs.
- Saul, N., (1999). Richard II. History Today. Vol. 49(9), 5 pgs.
- Jones, W.R., (1979). The English Church and Royal Propaganda during the Hundred Years' War. The Journal of British Studies, Vol. 19(1), 12 pages.
- Perroy, E., (1951). The Hundred Years' War. New York, New York: Oxford University Press.

||This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page.
Preventive medicine or preventive care consists of measures taken to prevent diseases, (or injuries) rather than curing them or treating their symptoms. This contrasts in method with curative and palliative medicine, and in scope with public health methods (which work at the level of population health rather than individual health). Occupational medicine operates very often within the preventive medicine.
Preventive medicine strategies are typically described as taking place at the primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary prevention levels. In addition, the term primal prevention has been used to describe all measures taken to ensure fetal well-being and prevent any long-term health consequences from gestational history and/or disease. The rationale for such efforts is the evidence demonstrating the link between fetal well-being, or "primal health," and adult health. Primal prevention strategies typically focus on providing future parents with: education regarding the consequences of epigenetic influences on their child, sufficient leave time for both parents or, for lack of it, at least some kin caregiving.
Simple examples of preventive medicine include hand washing, breastfeeding, and immunizations. Preventive care may include examinations and screening tests tailored to an individual's age, health, and family history. For example, a person with a family history of certain cancers or other diseases would begin screening at an earlier age and/or more frequently than those with no such family history. On the other side of preventive medicine, some nonprofit organizations, such as the Northern California Cancer Center, apply epidemiologic research towards finding ways to prevent diseases.
|Prevention levels||Doctor’s side|
|Primary prevention||Methods to avoid occurrence of disease. Most population-based health promotion efforts are of this type.|
|Secondary prevention||Methods to diagnose and treat existent disease in early stages before it causes significant morbidity.|
|Tertiary prevention||Methods to reduce negative impact of existent disease by restoring function and reducing disease-related complications.|
|Quaternary prevention||Methods to mitigate or avoid results of unnecessary or excessive interventions in the health system.|
Universal, selective, and indicated 
Gordon (1987) in the area of disease prevention, and later Kumpfer and Baxley in the area of substance use proposed a three-tiered preventive intervention classification system: universal, selective, and indicated prevention. Amongst others, this typology has gained favour and is used by the U.S. Institute of Medicine, the NIDA and the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction.
|Universal prevention||Involves whole population (nation, local community, school, district) and aims to prevent or delay the abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs. All individuals, without screening, are provided with information and skills needed to prevent the problem.|
|Selective prevention||Involves groups whose risk of developing problems of alcohol abuse or dependence is above average. Subgroups may be distinguished by traits such as age, gender, family history, or economic status. For example, drug campaigns in recreational settings.|
|Indicated prevention||Involves a screening process, and aims to identify individuals who exhibit early signs of substance abuse and other problem behaviours. Identifiers may include falling grades among students, known problem consumption or conduct disorders, alienation from parents, school, and positive peer groups etc.|
Outside the scope of this three-tier model is environmental prevention. Environmental prevention approaches are typically managed at the regulatory or community level and focus on ways to deter drug consumption. Prohibition and bans (e.g. on smoking, alcohol advertising) may be viewed as the ultimate environmental restriction. However, in practice, environmental preventions programs embrace various initiatives at the macro and micro level, from government monopolies for alcohol sales through roadside sobriety or drug tests, worker/pupil/student drug testing, increased policing in sensitive settings (near schools, at rock festivals), and legislative guidelines aimed at precipitating punishments (warnings, penalties, fines).
Professionals involved in the public health aspect of this practice may be involved in entomology, pest control, and public health inspections. Public health inspections can include recreational waters, swimming pools, beaches, food preparation and serving, and industrial hygiene inspections and surveys.
In the United States, preventive medicine is a medical specialty, and has one of the 24 certifying boards recognized by the American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) dedicated to it as well as one of the 18 certifying boards recognized by the American Osteopathic Association Bureau of Osteopathic Specialists (AOABOS). It encompasses three areas of specialization:
- General preventive medicine and public health
- Aerospace medicine
- Occupational medicine
To become board-certified in one of the preventive medicine areas of specialization, a licensed U.S. physician (M.D. or D.O.) must successfully complete a preventive medicine medical residency program following a one-year internship. Following that, the physician must pass the preventive medicine board examination. The residency program is at least two years in length and includes completion of a master's degree in public health (MPH) or equivalent. The board exam takes a full day: the morning session concentrates on general preventive medicine questions, while the afternoon session concentrates on the one of the three areas of specialization that the applicant has studied.
In addition, there are two subspecialty areas of certification:
These certifications require sitting for an examination following successful completion of an MT or UHB fellowship and prior board certification in one of the 24 ABMS-recognized specialties or 18 AOABOS-recognized specialties.
Prophylaxis (Greek: προφυλάσσω to guard or prevent beforehand) is any medical or public health procedure whose purpose is to prevent, rather than treat or cure, a disease or other medical issue. In general terms, prophylactic measures are divided between primary prophylaxis (to prevent the development of a disease) and secondary prophylaxis (whereby the disease has already developed and the patient is protected against worsening of this process).
Some specific examples of prophylaxis include:
- Many vaccines are prophylactic, vaccines such as polio vaccine, smallpox vaccine, measles vaccine, mumps vaccine and others have greatly reduced many childhood diseases; HPV vaccines prevent certain cancers; influenza vaccine.
- Birth control methods are used to prevent unwanted pregnancy. Condoms, for instance, are sometimes euphemistically referred to as "prophylactics" because of their use to prevent pregnancy, as well as the transmission of sexually transmitted infections.
- Daily and moderate physical exercise in various forms can be called prophylactic because it can maintain or improve one's health. Cycling for transport appears to very significantly improve health by reducing risk of heart diseases, various cancers, muscular- and skeletal diseases, and overall mortality.
- Eating plenty of fruits and vegetables each day may be prophylactic. It may reduce the risk of heart disease.
- Fluoride therapy and tooth cleaning, either at home or by a professional, are parts of dental prophylaxis or oral prophylaxis.
- Antibiotics are sometimes used prophylactically: For example, during the 2001 anthrax attacks scare in the United States, patients believed to be exposed were given ciprofloxacin. In similar manner, the use of antibiotic ointments on burns and other wounds is prophylactic. Antibiotics are also given prophylactically just before some medical procedures such as pacemaker insertion.
- Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) may, with caution, be an example of a chronic migraine preventive (see amitriptyline and migraines' prevention by medicine).
- Antimalarials such as chloroquine and mefloquine are used both in treatment and as prophylaxis by visitors to countries where malaria is endemic to prevent the development of the parasitic Plasmodium, which cause malaria.
- Mechanical measures (such as graduated compression stockings or intermittent pneumatic compression) and drugs (such as low-molecular-weight heparin, unfractionated heparin, and fondaparinux) may be used in immobilized hospital patients at risk of venous thromboembolism.
- Risk reducing or prophylactic mastectomies may be carried out for carriers of the BRCA mutation gene to minimise the risk of developing breast cancer.
- Early and exclusive breastfeeding provides immunological protection against infectious diseases and well as reduced risk of chronic diseases for both mother and child.
- Polypill for prevention of e.g. cardiovascular disease.
- Potassium iodide is used prophylactically to protect the thyroid gland from absorbing inhaled or ingested radioactive iodine, which may lead to the development of thyroid cancer; radioactive iodine may be released into the environment in the event of an accident at a nuclear power plant, or the detonation of a nuclear explosive (see thyroid protection due to nuclear accidents and emergencies).
- Prophylaxis may be administered as oral medication. Oral prophylaxis includes: PEP, nPEP, or PrEP. PEP stands for post-exposure prophylaxis used in an occupational setting e.g., to prevent the spread of HIV or Hepatitis C from patient to staff following an accidental needlestick. nPEP is non-occupational post-exposure prophylaxis. nPEP may be used in a sexual or injection exposure to HIV, hepatitis, or other infectious agents; for example, during intercourse, if the condom breaks and one partner is HIV-positive, nPEP will help to decrease the probability that the HIV-negative partner becomes infected with HIV. (An nPEP is sometimes known as a PEPse - i.e. post-exposure prophylaxis sexual encounter.) PrEP is a measure taken daily (before, during, and after) possible exposure; for example, by a person who inconsistently uses condoms during sex with a partner who may have an HIV infection.
Since preventive medicine deals with healthy individuals or populations the costs and potential harms from interventions need even more careful examination than in treatment. For an intervention to be applied widely it generally needs to be affordable and highly cost effective.
For instance, intrauterine devices (IUD) are highly effective and highly cost effective contraceptives, however where universal health care is not available the initial cost may be a barrier. IUDs work for several years (3 to 7 or more) and cost less over a year or two's time than most other reversible contraceptive methods. They are also highly cost effective, saving health insurers and the public significant costs in unwanted pregnancies. Making contraceptives available with no up front cost is one way to increase usage, improving health and saving money.
Preventive solutions may be less profitable and therefore less attractive to makers and marketers of pharmaceuticals and medical devices. Birth control pills which are taken every day and may take in a thousand dollars over ten years may generate more profits than an IUD, which despite a huge initial markup only generates a few hundred dollars over the same period.
Leading cause of preventable death 
|Cause||Deaths caused (millions per year)|
|Sexually transmitted infections||3.0|
|Overweight and obesity||2.5|
|Indoor air pollution from solid fuels||1.8|
|Unsafe water and poor sanitation||1.6|
|Intervention||Percent of all child deaths preventable|
|Water, sanitation, hygiene||3|
|Newborn temperature management||2|
|Nevirapine and replacement feeding||2|
|Antibiotics for premature rupture of membranes||1|
|Antimalarial intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancy||<1%|
|Cause||Deaths caused||% of all deaths|
|Poor diet and physical inactivity||365,000||15.2|
|Sexually transmitted infections||20,000||0.8|
See also 
- American Board of Preventive Medicine
- European College of Preventive and Lifestyle Medicine
- American Osteopathic Board of Preventive Medicine
- Mental illness prevention
- Monitoring (medicine)
- Post-exposure prophylaxis
- Pre-exposure prophylaxis
- Preventive Medicine (journal)
- Prophylactic rule
- Preventive Medicine at the US National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
- Primal Research Centre, London
- Primal Health Research Databank
- Effect of In Utero and Early-Life Conditions on Adult Health and Disease, by P.D.Gluckman et al., N ENGL J MED 359;1
- Origins: How the nine months before birth shape the rest of your life, by Annie Murphy Paul, Time magazine, 176.14, 2010
- Kuehlein T, Sghedoni D, Visentin G, Gérvas J, Jamoule M. Quaternary prevention: a task of the general practitioner. PrimaryCare. 2010; 10(18):350-4.
- Primary Prevention at the US National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
- Secondary Prevention at the US National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
- Tertiary Prevention at the US National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
- Gofrit ON, Shemer J, Leibovici D, Modan B, Shapira SC. Quaternary prevention: a new look at an old challenge. Isr Med Assoc J. 2000;2(7):498-500.
- Gordon, R. (1987), ‘An operational classification of disease prevention’, in Steinberg, J. A. and Silverman, M. M. (eds.), Preventing Mental Disorders, Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1987.
- Kumpfer, K. L., and Baxley, G. B. (1997), 'Drug abuse prevention: What works?', National Institute on Drug Abuse, Rockville.
- "What Is Prophylaxis?". wiseGEEK.
- Jamie Michelle Womack (2010) "Safety and adherence: Issues that hinder childhood vaccinations" Journal of the American Academy of Physician Assistants
- Lars Bo Andersen et al. (June 2000). "All-cause mortality associated with physical activity during leisure time, work, sports, and cycling to work". Archives of Internal Medicine 160 (11): 1621–8. doi:10.1001/archinte.160.11.1621. PMID 10847255.
- United States Department of Agriculture. "Why is it important to eat fruit?". United States Department of Agriculture. Retrieved 8 February 2012.
- "Recommendations for using fluoride to prevent and control dental caries in the United States. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention". MMWR. Recommendations and reports : Morbidity and mortality weekly report. Recommendations and reports / Centers for Disease Control 50 (RR-14): 1–42. 2001. PMID 11521913.
- Creeth, J. E.; Gallagher, A.; Sowinski, J.; Bowman, J.; Barrett, K.; Lowe, S.; Patel, K.; Bosma, M. L. (2009). "The effect of brushing time and dentifrice on dental plaque removal in vivo". Journal of dental hygiene : JDH / American Dental Hygienists' Association 83 (3): 111–116. PMID 19723429.
- de Oliveira JC, Martinelli M, D'Orio Nishioka SA, et al. (2009). "Efficacy of antibiotic prophylaxis prior to the implantation of pacemakers and cardioverter-defibrillators: Results of a large, prospective, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial". Circulation: Arrhythmia and Electrophysiology 2 (1): 29–34. doi:10.1161/CIRCEP.108.795906. PMID 19808441.
- Qaseem A, Chou R, Humphrey LL, et al. (2011). "Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis in Hospitalized Patients: A Clinical Practice Guideline From the American College of Physicians". Annals of Internal Medicine 155 (9): 625–632. doi:10.1059/0003-4819-155-9-201111010-00011. PMID 22041951.
- Lederle FA, Zylla D, MacDonald R, et al. (2011). "Venous Thromboembolism Prophylaxis in Hospitalized Medical Patients and Those With Stroke: A Background Review for an American College of Physicians Clinical Practice Guideline". Annals of Internal Medicine 155 (9): 602–615. doi:10.1059/0003-4819-155-9-201111010-00008. PMID 22041949.
- Kahn SR, Lim W, Dunn AS, et al. (February 2012). "Prevention of VTE in Nonsurgical Patients: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines". Chest 141 (2 suppl): e195S–e226S. doi:10.1378/chest.11-2296. PMID 22315261.
- Ip S, Chung M, Raman G, ChewP, Magula N, DeVine D, Litt M, Trikalinos T, Lau J. Breastfeeding and maternal and infant health outcomes in developed countries. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment Number 153. 2007 April; AHRQ Publication No. 07-E007.
- J. Joseph Speidel, Cynthia C. Harper, and Wayne C. Shields (September 2008). "The Potential of Long-acting Reversible Contraception to Decrease Unintended Pregnancy". Contraception.
- James Trussell, Anjana Lalla, Quan Doan, Eileen Reyes, Lionel Pinto, Joseph Gricar (2009). "Cost effectiveness of contraceptives in the United States". Contraception 79 (1): 5–14. doi:10.1016/j.contraception.2008.08.003. PMID 19041435.
- Monea J, Thomas A (June 2011). "Unintended pregnancy and taxpayer spending". Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 43 (2): 88–93. doi:10.1363/4308811. PMID 21651707.
- Lopez AD, Mathers CD, Ezzati M, Jamison DT, Murray CJ (May 2006). "Global and regional burden of disease and risk factors, 2001: systematic analysis of population health data". Lancet 367 (9524): 1747–57. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68770-9. PMID 16731270.
- Jones G, Steketee R, Black R, Bhutta Z, Morris S, and the Bellagio Child Survival Study Group* (July 5, 2003 2003). "How many child deaths can we prevent this year?". Lancet 362 (9524): 1747–57.
- Mokdad AH, Marks JS, Stroup DF, Gerberding JL (March 2004). "Actual causes of death in the United States, 2000". JAMA 291 (10): 1238–45. doi:10.1001/jama.291.10.1238. PMID 15010446.
- US Preventive Medicine Task Force
- US Preventive Medicine
- The Prevention Plan
- Health-EU Portal Prevention and Promotion

Real form (Lie theory)
In mathematics, the notion of a real form relates objects defined over the field of real and complex numbers. A real Lie algebra g0 is called a real form of a complex Lie algebra g if g is the complexification of g0:
Real forms for Lie groups and algebraic groups 
Using the Lie correspondence between Lie groups and Lie algebras, the notion of a real form can be defined for Lie groups. In the case of linear algebraic groups, the notions of complexification and real form have a natural description in the language of algebraic geometry.
Just as complex semisimple Lie algebras are classified by Dynkin diagrams, the real forms of a semisimple Lie algebra are classified by Satake diagrams, which are obtained from the Dynkin diagram of the complex form by labeling some vertices black (filled), and connecting some other vertices in pairs by arrows, according to certain rules.
It is a basic fact in the structure theory of complex semisimple Lie algebras that every such algebra has two special real forms: one is the compact real form and corresponds to a compact Lie group under the Lie correspondence (its Satake diagram has all vertices blackened), and the other is the split real form and corresponds to a Lie group that is as far as possible from being compact (its Satake diagram has no vertices blackened and no arrows). In the case of the complex special linear group SL(n,C), the compact real form is the special unitary group SU(n) and the split real form is the real special linear group SL(n,R). The classification of real forms of semisimple Lie algebras was accomplished by Élie Cartan in the context of Riemannian symmetric spaces. In general, there may be more than two real forms.
Suppose that g0 is a semisimple Lie algebra over the field of real numbers. By Cartan's criterion, the Killing form is nondegenerate, and can be diagonalized in a suitable basis with the diagonal entries +1 or -1. By Sylvester's law of inertia, the number of positive entries, or the positive index of intertia, is an invariant of the bilinear form, i.e. it does not depend on the choice of the diagonalizing basis. This is a number between 0 and the dimension of g which is an important invariant of the real Lie algebra, called its index.
Split real form 
A real form g0 of a complex semisimple Lie algebra g is said to be split, or normal, if in each Cartan decomposition g0 = k0 ⊕ p0, the space p0 contains a maximal Abelian subalgebra of g0, i.e. its Cartan subalgebra. Élie Cartan proved that every complex semisimple Lie algebra g has a split real form, which is unique up to isomorphism. It has maximal index among all real forms.
The split form corresponds to the Satake diagram with no vertices blackened and no arrows.
Compact real form 
A real Lie algebra g0 is called compact if the Killing form is negative definite, i.e. the index of g0 is zero. In this case g0 = k0 is a compact Lie algebra. It is known that under the Lie correspondence, compact Lie algebras correspond to compact Lie groups.
The compact form corresponds to the Satake diagram with all vertices blackened.
Construction of the compact real form 
In general, the construction of the compact real form uses structure theory of semisimple Lie algebras. For classical Lie algebras there is a more explicit construction.
Let g0 be a real Lie algebra of matrices over R that is closed under the transpose map,
The complexification g of g0 decomposes into the direct sum of g0 and ig0. The real vector space of matrices
is a subspace of the complex Lie algebra g that is closed under the commutators and consists of skew-hermitian matrices. It follows that u0 is a real Lie subalgebra of g, that its Killing form is negative definite (making it a compact Lie algebra), and that the complexification of u0 is g. Therefore, u0 is a compact form of g.
See also 
- Helgason 1978, p. 426

|— Neighborhood of Boston —|
|Nickname(s): Southie, Sobo|
|Annexed by Boston||1804|
|Time zone||Eastern (UTC-5)|
|Area code(s)||617 / 857|
South Boston is a densely populated neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts, located south and east of the Fort Point Channel and abutting Dorchester Bay. One of America's oldest and most historic neighborhoods, South Boston is most popularly known as Southie and is today often called Sobo by the young urban professionals who now own the neighborhood. Although formerly known as a working class Irish-American neighborhood, it is also home to the Boston area's small but vibrant Polish and Lithuanian communities and its demographics are rapidly changing. South Boston contains Dorchester Heights, where George Washington forced British troops to evacuate during the American Revolutionary War. In addition to being home to some of the oldest housing projects in the United States, South Boston has also more recently seen property values join the highest in the city.
Geographically, Dorchester Neck was an isthmus, a narrow strip of land that connected the mainland of the colonial settlement of Dorchester with Dorchester Heights. Landfill has since greatly increased the amount of land on the eastern side of the historical neck, and widened the connection to the mainland to the point that South Boston is no longer considered separate from it. South Boston gained an identity separate from Dorchester, but the two were annexed by Boston in pieces, from 1804 to 1870.
It was here on Dorchester Heights, during the American Revolutionary War that George Washington placed his cannon and forced the evacuation of the British troops from Boston on March 17, 1776. The British evacuated Boston and Fort William and Mary for Halifax, Nova Scotia. Fort William and Mary was replaced with a brick fortification known as Fort Independence. That fort was replaced by a granite fortification (bearing the same name) prior to the American Civil War, and still stands on Castle Island as a National Historic Landmark. Edgar Allan Poe was stationed at Castle Island for five months in 1827 and was inspired to write The Cask of Amontillado based on an early Castle Island legend.
In the 1990s, South Boston became the focus for a Supreme Court case on the right of gay and lesbian groups to participate in the Saint Patrick's Day (Evacuation Day) parade. The case was decided in favor of the parade's sponsors when the United States Supreme Court supported the South Boston Allied War Veterans' right to determine who can participate in their annual St. Patrick's Day parade. In 1996, local Dorchester author Paul Walkowski and Attorney William Connolly detailed the case in their book "From Trial Court to the United States Supreme Court".
"Southie" is home to what is thought to be the first Vietnam veterans memorial in the United States. It predated the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., by 13 months. It was dedicated on September 13, 1981 and is located at Independence Square, which is more commonly called M Street Park.
In recent years, the reality of South Boston has changed drastically as property values, especially in the City Point neighborhood near Castle Island, have risen to the level of some of the highest in the city. The City Point area of South Boston, labeled "East Side" by realtors, has seen a major increase in property values due to its close proximity to downtown Boston and gentrification. The "West Side" of South Boston, also known as the "lower end" by lifelong residents, though slower to begin the gentrification process also benefits from the proximity to not only downtown but also the popular South End. Additionally, the West Side is home to the first green residence (Gold LEED certified) in Boston — the Macallen Building which was featured in the movie The Greening of Southie. The City of Boston is investing in the West Side through developments like the ~150,000-square-foot (14,000 m2) mixed use (residential and commercial) building being developed by the Boston Redevelopment Authority on West Broadway.
Waterfront redevelopment 
The section of South Boston north of First Street is targeted for massive redevelopment by the administration of Mayor Thomas Menino and the Boston Redevelopment Authority (BRA). As of September 2010, the Seaport Square project was expected to cost $3 billion and replace parking lots between the federal courthouse and convention center with a 6,300,000-square-foot (590,000 m2) mixed-use development. Construction was expected to begin in 2011.
Initially referred to as the "Seaport District" by the BRA, this area was officially restyled the "South Boston Waterfront" after virulent protest from natives and local politicians, including City Council President James M. Kelly. The Central Artery/Tunnel (CA/T) Project, also known as the Big Dig, has created a completely new transportation network for this area and quite a few new hotel and office projects have come online in the past few years. The Boston Convention and Exhibition Center straddles D Street, the Seaport Hotel and Seaport World Trade Center is located on Commonwealth Pier, and a new home for the Institute of Contemporary Art hangs over Boston Harbor just north of Northern Avenue.
According to the Boston Waterfront Guide the South Boston Waterfront now has 55 restaurants, 4 hotels, 9 major attractions and continues to grow. The latest restaurant to open in nearby is Ming Tsai's Blue Dragon Restaurant in the old A Street Deli Building.
MassChallenge has its headquarters at One Marina Park. Fish and Richardson is also presently at One Marina Park
Public schools are operated by Boston Public Schools.
- South Boston High School, which is now divided into two different high schools all within the same building, 1st floor is Excel High School which focuses on public safety studies, 2nd floor is also Excel High School, which focuses on computer technology, 3rd floor is Boston Green Academy, which focuses on science studies (9-12).
- James Condon Elementary School (K-5)
- Joseph P. Tynan School (K-5)
- Michael J. Perkins School (K-5)
- Oliver Hazard Perry School (K-8)
- UP Academy Charter School of Boston (6-8)
- St. Peter Academy (K-8)
- South Boston Catholic Academy (K-8) (formerly St. Brigid's School and Gate of Heaven which were combined)
- Julie's Family Learning Center (P,K,Montessori)
Cultural and language schools 
- Szkola Jezyka Polskiego w Bostonie (John Paul II Polish School for Children and Teens)
- Wood's School of Irish Dance
Places of worship 
Catholic Churches 
- Our Lady of Czestochowa (Polish)
- Saint Monica - Saint Augustine (currently closed)
- Saint Peter (Lithuanian)
- Saint Vincent de Paul
- Our Lady of Good Voyage
- Saint Brigid
Albanian Orthodox Churches 
- St George Cathedral: Located near the intersection of East and West Broadway, St George is the largest Orthodox Christian house of worship in Massachusetts. As the mother church of the Albanian diocese, the Cathedral serves as episcopal seat of His Grace, Bishop Nikon, Bishop of Boston, New England and the Albanian Archdiocese.
- Albanian Holy Trinity Church, Kisha Shqiptare e Shen Trinise: Located at 245 D Street Boston, Massachusetts 02127.
- St John the Baptist
- St Matthew and the Redeemer (former)
Community resources 
- South Boston Neighborhood House
- Boys and Girls Club of Boston
- Labouré Center
- South Boston Branch Library
- South Boston Community Health Center
- South Boston Action Center
- The Paraclete Center
- Tynan Community Center
Castle Island, Pleasure Bay, M Street Beach and Carson Beach 
Fort Independence, a pentagonal five-bastioned, granite fort built between 1834 and 1851, is the dominating feature of Castle Island. This 22-acre urban park is connected to the mainland by both pedestrian and vehicular causeways. Pleasure Bay, the M Street Beach and Carson Beach form a three-mile segment of parkland and beach along the South Boston shoreline of Dorchester Bay. Carson Beach offers some beautiful views and great public amenities: a rehabilitated Mothers' Rest, public restrooms, exhibit space, first aid and lifeguard functions, while the outdoor courtyards allow space for passive recreation. Carson Beach also features a walkway which allows one to walk, bike, or run along the water's edge from Castle Island to the Kennedy Library.
Fort Independence and Castle Island are on the State and National Registers of Historic Places, and the fort is a National Historic Landmark. Fort Independence is open from Memorial Day to Columbus Day, hours vary. Fort tours are conducted by the Castle Island Association in the summer months and there is interpretive signage for self-guided tours. The principal program theme, the History of Castle Island, stresses the role of the fort in harbor defense."
Dorchester Heights (Thomas Park) 
Atop the Dorchester Heights hill sits a tall monument commemorating the Patriot battery that drove the British out of Boston. A popular site to view the Fourth of July fireworks, the Thomas Park (the oval drive around Dorchester Heights) area is one of the most attractive areas in South Boston.
Medal Of Honor Park (M Street Park) 
Between M and N streets and north of Broadway, the M Street Park was one of the most desirable addresses in Boston in the late 19th century, and the brownstone buildings overlooking the park on the south side of the park remain some of the best examples of this style of architecture in New England. M Street Park is also home to the 1st standing Vietnam memorial in the nation included in this memorial are all the names of the South Boston residents who gave their lives fighting for the freedom of the United States. Also a popular spot for, families, dog lovers, and for watching the St Patrick's Day Parade. In addition also, two softball fields, little league field, basketball court, and play ground all attribute to the beautiful neighborhood which is South Boston The M Street Softball League.
Public housing 
South Boston is home to some of the oldest public housing projects in the United States.[dead link] In the last 30 years they have changed from having a mostly Irish American population to a more ethnically mixed population. The housing facilities are under the control of the Boston Housing Authority (BHA) and include West Broadway which was built in 1949 and occupies 20 acres (81,000 m2), West Ninth Street (these three facilities are next to each other and commonly called D street), Old Colony which was built in 1941, and Mary Ellen McCormack, which is the BHA's oldest development, being constructed in the 1930s. It was originally called Old Harbor Village. 'The West Broadway Ninth Street Projects were knocked down in 2005 and are now a retirement housing building.
MBTA bus service connects these stations with the residential areas of South Boston, downtown Boston and the Back Bay. The MBTA Silver Line, a Bus rapid transit service running partly in a tunnel from South Station, also serves the north side of South Boston. South Boston is also served by five bus routes including the numbers 5, 7, 9, 10, 11.
Notable residents 
South Boston has been the birthplace and home to a number of notable people, including:
References in popular culture 
- The 2010 crime thriller The Town starring and directed by Ben Affleck, was partly filmed in South Boston. Scenes taking place at the fictional Town Flowers were filmed at Thornton Flower Shop on Dorchester Street.
- Gone Baby Gone (2007), the directorial debut of Ben Affleck, was shot in South Boston.
- Black Irish (2007)
- The Departed (2006), starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Matt Damon, Jack Nicholson and Mark Wahlberg was shot in South Boston and was loosely based on the life of famed Irish mob leader James "Whitey" Bulger and the events leading up to his hiatus and being an informant for the FBI.
- In Good Will Hunting, a 1997 drama film directed by Gus Van Sant and written by Ben Affleck and Matt Damon, South Boston is the home of the fictional Irish American character Will Hunting, a troubled young prodigy played by Damon, who works as a janitor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
- Mystic River directed by Clint Eastwood and starring Tim Robbins, Kevin Bacon, and Sean Penn was partially filmed in South Boston. A local corner store, Miller's Market of 366 K Street, was used as one of the character's businesses.
- The movie The Boondock Saints, about fraternal twins, Connor and Murphy MacManus, who become vigilantes after killing two members of the Russian Mafia in self-defense, also takes place in South Boston.
- The 1999 movie Southie centers around Danny Quinn, played by Donnie Wahlberg, who returns home to South Boston from New York City and gets stuck between his friends, who are supported by one Irish gang, and his family, who are members of another. Wahlberg is a native of nearby Dorchester.
- The Verdict, a 1982 feature film which tells the story of a down-on-his-luck alcoholic lawyer who pushes a medical malpractice case in order to improve his own situation, but discovers along the way that he is doing the right thing, takes place in, and was filmed in, South Boston. It starred Paul Newman.
- In the 1987 romantic comedy film, Broadcast News, about a virtuoso television news producer (Holly Hunter), who has daily emotional breakdowns, a brilliant yet prickly reporter (Albert Brooks) and his charismatic but far less seasoned rival (William Hurt), a young Aaron Altman (played by Dwayne Markee) states, "You're never gonna leave South Boston and I'm gonna see the whole damn world."
- In the film The Friends of Eddie Coyle, about a low level Boston gangster who was looking at a long prison sentence for repeat offenses, and so decided to snitch on his friends to avoid jail time.
- In the TV series Buffy the Vampire Slayer the character of Faith Lehane (Eliza Dushku) is a Slayer who originally hails from South Boston. Dushku grew up in nearby Watertown.
- Eliza Dushku's character refers to being a Southie native in the "Stage Fright" episode of the TV series Dollhouse.
- The Leverage character of Nathan Ford is possibly from South Boston, as the episode "The Beantown Bailout Job" indicated he had grown up with a ranking member of the Irish Mob.
- Julianne Moore's character in a series of 2009 episodes of 30 Rock mentioned that she was from South Boston.
- In an episode of Sabrina, the Teenage Witch, Soleil Moon Frye's character mentions that "it's better than living in a shack in Southie."
- In the Showtime drama Dexter, the character Joseph Quinn (played by Desmond Harrington) is from South Boston.
There have been a number of books written about South Boston.
Video games 
The Scout from online game Team Fortress 2 hails from South Boston.
Voodoo, in Medal of Honor (2010), is from South Boston. He has a very distinct accent.
- "U.S. Supreme Court HURLEY v. IRISH-AMERICAN GAY GROUP OF BOSTON, ___ U.S. ___ (1995)". FindLaw. 18 June 1995. Retrieved 2009-02-02.
- Walkowski, Paul; Connolly, William (April 1996). From Trial Court to the United States Supreme Court Anatomy of a Free Speech Case: The Incredible Inside Story Behind the Theft of the St. Patrick's Parade. Branden Books. ISBN 0-8283-2012-8.
- "History of the Memorial". South Boston Vietnam Memorial. Retrieved 2009-02-02.
- The Greening of Southie (2008)
- "South Boston Waterfront Public Realm Plan". Boston Redevelopment Authority. October 21, 2003. Retrieved 2009-02-01.
- "Seaport makeover to begin next year". Boston Metro, 23 September 2010, p 3.
- James M. Kelly, long-time city councilor and South Boston icon, dies. Boston Globe, January 9, 2007.
- Cf. Sammarco (2006), p.25
- History of the South Baptist Church, Boston, Boston : Alfred Mudge & Son, 1865.
- Boston Connects. South Boston
- "Welcome to the Boston Housing Authority". Boston Housing Authority. Retrieved 2009-02-01.
- "West Broadway". Boston Housing Authority. Retrieved 2009-02-01.
- "West Ninth Street". Boston Housing Authority. Retrieved 2009-02-01.
- "Old Colony". Boston Housing Authority. Retrieved 2009-02-01.
- "Mary Ellen McCormack". Boston Housing Authority. Retrieved 2009-02-01.
- "Foley". Boston Housing Authority. Retrieved 2009-02-01.
- "Monsignor Powers". Boston Housing Authority. Retrieved 2009-02-01.
- Marquard, Bryan (2010-06-22). "John Ferruggio, at 84; hero of 1970 Pan Am hijacking". Boston Globe. Retrieved 2010-06-27.
- Sammarco, Anthony Mitchell; Rosenberg, Charlie, South Boston: Then & Now, Arcadia Publishing Company, 2006
Further reading 
- Charles Bancroft Gillespie (1900), Illustrated history of South Boston, South Boston, Mass: Inquirer Pub. Co.
- Malloy, Ione (1 October 1986). Southie Won't Go: A Teacher's Diary of the Desegregation of South Boston High School. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-01276-3.
- O'Connor, Thomas (24 February 1994). South Boston, My Home Town: The History of an Ethnic Neighborhood. Northeastern University Press. ISBN 1-55553-188-1.
- Alcorn, Frank (7 October 2005). Southie Boy. Cork Hill Press. ISBN 1-59408-054-2.
- Weeks, Kevin; Karas, Phyllis (10 March 2006). Brutal: The Untold Story of My Life Inside Whitey Bulger's Irish Mob. William Morrow. ISBN 0-06-112269-6.
- MacDonald, Michael Patrick (4 October 2007). All Souls: A Family Story from Southie. Beacon Press. ISBN 0-8070-7213-3.
- Born before plastic: stories from Boston's most enduring neighborhoods; North End, Roxbury, and South Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, USA: City of Boston and Grub Street, Inc., 2007
|Wikimedia Commons has media related to: South Boston|
- South Boston Online
- South Boston Tribune
- South Boston Neighborhood at City of Boston.gov
- Topographic Map of South Boston
- Southies St Patrick's Day Parade
- South Boston Little League
- South Boston on Boston.com
- Boston Public Library. Boston Pictorial Archive. Images of South Boston
- South Boston Waterfront Photo Gallery

Molecular Biology and Genetics
Statistics of barcoding coverage
|Specimen Records:||10||Public Records:||0|
|Specimens with Sequences:||8||Public Species:||0|
|Specimens with Barcodes:||0||Public BINs:||0|
|Species With Barcodes:||0|
Locations of barcode samples
The Geastrales are an order of gasterocarpic basidiomycetes (fungi) that relates to Cantharellales. The order contains the single family Geastraceae, commonly known as "earthstars". It includes the genera Geastrum and Myriostoma. About 64 species are classified in this family, divided among eight genera. Older classifications place this family in the order Lycoperdales, but more recently they had been placed in Phallales. As of 2010, the family is classified as the sole taxon in the Geastrales order.
One member of the Geastraceae, Sphaerobolus stellatus—a nuisance organism in landscapes known as "shotgun fungus" or "cannonball fungus"—colonizes wood-based mulches and may throw black, spore-containing globs onto nearby painted surfaces.
The fruit bodies of several earthstars are hygroscopic: in dry weather the "petals" will dry and curl up around the soft spore sac, protecting it. In this state, often the whole fungus becomes detached from the ground and may roll around as a tumbleweed does. When the weather dampens, the "petals" moisten and uncurl and some even curl backward lifting the spore sac up. This then allows rain or animal movement to hit the spore sac so it will puff out spores when enough moisture is present for them to germinate.
- Hosaka K, Bates ST, Beever RE, Castellano MA, Colgan W 3rd, Domínguez LS, Nouhra ER, Geml J, Giachini AJ, Kenney SR, Simpson NB, Spatafora JW, Trappe JM. (2006). "Molecular phylogenetics of the gomphoid-phalloid fungi with an establishment of the new subclass Phallomycetidae and two new orders". Mycologia 98 (6): 949–59. doi:10.3852/mycologia.98.6.949. PMID 17486971.
- Corda ACJ. (1842). Icones fungorum hucusque cognitorum (in Latin) 5. Prague: J.G. Calve. pp. 1–92 (see p. 25).
- Kirk et al. (2008), p. 648.
- Kirk PM, Cannon PF, David JC, Stalpers JA. (2001). Ainsworth & Bisby's Dictionary of the Fungi (9th ed.). Oxon, UK: CABI Bioscience. p. 205. ISBN 0-85199-377-X.
- Kirk PM, Cannon PF, Minter DW, Stalpers JA. (2008). Dictionary of the Fungi (10th ed.). Wallingford, UK: CAB International. p. 274. ISBN 9780851998268.
To request an improvement, please leave a comment on the page. Thank you!

A token to the future : a digital ‘archive’ of early Australian children’s literature
Mallan, Kerry M., Cross, Amy, & Allan, Cherie (2012) A token to the future : a digital ‘archive’ of early Australian children’s literature. Papers: Explorations into Children's Literature, 22(1), pp. 94-108.
This essay considers a specific digital ‘archive’ of early Australian children’s literature, known as the Children’s Literature Digital Resources (CLDR), which is located in AustLit: The Australian Literature Resource ( http://www.austlit.edu.au ). We examine what the CLDR collection can tell us about Australia’s history. To narrow the scope, we focus on how Australia was constructing itself as a nation with its own character, or national identity, in texts written for children from the latter part of the nineteenth century up until the end of World War II. Our approach is to consider how early Australian children’s literature included in the CLDR collection rhetorically constructs nation and place, and in so doing constructs an Australian identity for its implied readers.
Citation countsare sourced monthly fromand citation databases.
These databases contain citations from different subsets of available publications and different time periods and thus the citation count from each is usually different. Some works are not in either database and no count is displayed. Scopus includes citations from articles published in 1996 onwards, and Web of Science generally from 1980 onwards.
Citations counts from theindexing service can be viewed at the linked Google Scholar™ search.
Full-text downloadsdisplays the total number of times this work’s files (e.g., a PDF) have been downloaded from QUT ePrints as well as the number of downloads in the previous 365 days. The count includes downloads for all files if a work has more than one.
|Item Type:||Journal Article|
|Keywords:||Australian children's literature, digital archive, AustLit, Children's literature digital resources , national identity|
|Subjects:||Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification > LANGUAGES COMMUNICATION AND CULTURE (200000) > LITERARY STUDIES (200500) > Australian Literature (excl. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Literature) (200502)|
|Divisions:||Current > Research Centres > Children & Youth Research Centre|
|Copyright Owner:||Copyright 2012 The Authors|
|Deposited On:||03 Sep 2012 08:46|
|Last Modified:||27 Sep 2012 14:35|
Repository Staff Only: item control page

Snow leopard population discovered in Afghanistan
The Wildlife Conservation Society has discovered a surprisingly healthy population of rare snow leopards living in the mountainous reaches of northeastern Afghanistan's Wakhan Corridor, according to a new study. The discovery gives hope to the world's most elusive big cat, which calls home to some of the world's tallest mountains. Between 4,500 and 7,500 snow leopards remain in the wild scattered across a dozen countries in Central Asia.
The study, which appears in the June 29th issue of the Journal of Environmental Studies, is by WCS conservationists Anthony Simms, Zalmai Moheb, Salahudin, Hussain Ali, Inayat Ali and Timothy Wood.
WCS-trained community rangers used camera traps to document the presence of snow leopards at 16 different locations across a wide landscape. The images represent the first camera trap records of snow leopards in Afghanistan. WCS has been conserving wildlife and improving local livelihoods in the region since 2006 with support from the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID).
"This is a wonderful discovery – it shows that there is real hope for snow leopards in Afghanistan," said Peter Zahler, WCS Deputy Director for Asia Programs. "Now our goal is to ensure that these magnificent animals have a secure future as a key part of Afghanistan's natural heritage."
According to the study, snow leopards remain threatened in the region. Poaching for their pelts, persecution by shepherds, and the capture of live animals for the illegal pet trade have all been documented in the Wakhan Corridor. In response, WCS has developed a set of conservation initiatives to protect snow leopards. These include partnering with local communities, training of rangers, and education and outreach efforts.
Anthony Simms, lead author and the project's Technical Advisor, said, "By developing a community-led management approach, we believe snow leopards will be conserved in Afghanistan over the long term."
WCS-led initiatives are already paying off. Conservation education is now occurring in every school in the Wakhan region. Fifty-nine rangers have been trained to date. They monitor not only snow leopards but other species including Marco Polo sheep and ibex while also enforcing laws against poaching. WCS has also initiated the construction of predator-proof livestock corrals and a livestock insurance program that compensates shepherds, though initial WCS research shows that surprisingly few livestock fall to predators in the region.
In Afghanistan, USAID has provided support to WCS to work in more than 55 communities across the country and is training local people to monitor and sustainably manage their wildlife and other resources. One of the many outputs of this project was the creation of Afghanistan's first national park – Band-e-Amir – which is now co-managed by the government and a committee consisting of all 14 communities living around the park.
Snow leopards have declined by as much as 20 percent over the past 16 years and are considered endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
WCS is a world leader in the care and conservation of snow leopards. WCS's Bronx Zoo became the first zoo in the Western Hemisphere to exhibit these rare spotted cats in 1903. In the past three decades, nearly 80 cubs have been born in the Bronx and have been sent to live at 30 zoos in the U.S. and eight countries in Europe, Asia, Australia, and North America.
Source: Wildlife Conservation Society
- Wildlife Conservation Society finds 'world's least known bird' breeding in AfghanistanWed, 13 Jan 2010, 14:10:53 EST
- WCS confirms the return of the Persian leopard In Afghanistan's central highlandsMon, 5 Dec 2011, 22:39:32 EST
- First ever videos of snow leopard mother and cubs in dens recorded in MongoliaThu, 12 Jul 2012, 18:05:03 EDT
- Wildlife Conservation Society documents pneumonia outbreak in endangered markhor Sun, 8 Jan 2012, 21:31:30 EST
- Rare Andean cat no longer exclusive to the AndesWed, 16 Mar 2011, 14:36:29 EDT
- Threatened snow leopards found in Afghanistanfrom AP ScienceFri, 15 Jul 2011, 0:00:36 EDT
- Elusive snow leopards thrive in Afghan regionfrom MSNBC: ScienceThu, 14 Jul 2011, 16:00:21 EDT
- Photos: Elusive Snow Leopards Thrive in Surprising Spotfrom Live ScienceThu, 14 Jul 2011, 11:30:44 EDT
- Cameras catch snow leopards in Afghanistanfrom UPIThu, 14 Jul 2011, 5:30:29 EDT
- Cameras catch snow leopards in Afghanistanfrom UPIWed, 13 Jul 2011, 18:00:26 EDT
- Snow leopard population discovered in Afghanistanfrom Science BlogWed, 13 Jul 2011, 14:00:23 EDT
- Snow leopard population discovered in Afghanistanfrom Science DailyWed, 13 Jul 2011, 13:30:31 EDT
- Snow leopard population discovered in Afghanistanfrom PhysorgWed, 13 Jul 2011, 12:32:13 EDT
- Healthy Snow Leopard Population Discovered in Afghanistanfrom Newswise - ScinewsWed, 13 Jul 2011, 12:32:02 EDT
Latest Science NewsletterGet the latest and most popular science news articles of the week in your Inbox! It's free!
Check out our next project, Biology.Net
From other science news sites
Popular science news articles
- UC Davis engineers create on-wetting fabric drains sweat
- Not just blowing in the wind: Compressing air for renewable energy storage
- Amazon River exhales virtually all carbon taken up by rain forest
- 1 in 10 teens using 'study drugs,' but parents aren't paying attention
- Slow earthquakes: It's all in the rock mechanics
No popular news yet
No popular news yet
- Stem cell transplant restores memory, learning in mice
- 2 landmark studies report on success of using image-guided brachytherapy to treat cervical cancer
- Researchers discover mushrooms can provide as much vitamin D as supplements
- Cutting back on sleep harms blood vessel function and breathing control
- Study: Low-dose aspirin stymies proliferation of 2 breast cancer lines

Estonia Has Least Polluted Urban Air in the World27 September 2011
Levels of fine airborne particles in Estonia's urban areas are the lowest in the world, a comparative table published by the World Health Organization (WHO) on 26 September reveals. The Indian Ocean island nation Mauritius ranked second while Canada landed in third place, according to the WHO data.
The report looked at two different particle sizes: those with a diameter less than 2.5 micrometers (PM2.5) and those smaller than 10 micrometers (PM10).
In Estonia, PM2.5 was registered at 5.4 micrograms per cubic meter of air, while PM10 was at 11 micrograms per cubic meter of air.
The highest concentration of particles was registered in Mongolia, where PM2.5 peaked at 63 and PM10 at 279 micrograms per cubic meter of air.
According to WHO, each year over two million people around the world die due to the inhalation of fine particulate matter. The WHO ranking list contained results of urban outdoor air pollution monitoring from almost 1 100 cities with a population of at least 100 000. Air pollution in Estonia was measured only in Tallinn and the data dates back to 2008.
Estonian Public Broadcasting

Brussels, 21 December 2005
The European Commission today proposed a new strategy on the prevention and recycling of waste. This long-term strategy aims to help Europe become a recycling society that seeks to avoid waste and uses waste as a resource. It will draw on the knowledge that the thematic strategy on resources, also adopted today, will generate. As a first step, the Commission proposes revising the 1975 Waste Framework Directive to set recycling standards and to include an obligation for Member States to develop national waste prevention programmes. This revision will also merge, streamline and clarify legislation, contributing to better regulation. The waste and resources strategies are two of the seven 'thematic' strategies required under the 6th Environment Action Programme (2002-2012).
Environment Commissioner Stavros Dimas said: “Waste volume has been disproportionately increasing outpacing even economic growth. Waste generation, disposal and recycling are of concern to all of us: individuals, companies and public authorities. Now is the time to modernise our approach and to promote more and better recycling. Our strategy does precisely that.
More waste than ever
EU environment legislation has helped improve the way we dispose waste and recycle specific waste streams, such as municipal waste, packaging, cars and electric and electronic equipment. Waste management has moved a long way from being a dirty, polluting business. High standards exist for landfills and incinerators. Industry now seeks to make a profit from waste instead of dumping it.
However, waste generation in the EU is estimated at more than 1.3 billion tonnes per year and is increasing at rates comparable to economic growth. For example, both GDP and municipal waste grew by 19% between 1995 and 2003. One consequence of this growth is that despite large increases in recycling, landfill - the environmentally most problematic way to get rid of waste - is only reducing slowly.
Waste policy must contribute to improving the way we use resources
What is needed now is to modernise and widen EU waste policy in the light of new knowledge. Companies and public authorities need to take a life-cycle approach that does not only look at pollution caused by waste. It must also take account of how waste policies can most efficiently reduce the negative environmental impacts associated with the use of resources through preventing, recycling and recovering wastes.
To move towards this objective EU waste law must create the right regulatory environment for recycling activities to develop.
Measures proposed by the strategy
The strategy comes as a package. It includes a legislative proposal to modernise the 1975 Waste Framework Directive.
The main elements of the proposed revision of the Waste Framework Directive are:
Further measures are programmed for the next five years to promote recycling and create a better regulatory environment for recycling activities. An Impact Assessment accompanies the strategy.
The other five thematic strategies the Commission is developing under the EU’s 6th Environment Action Programme cover air pollution (presented on 21 Sept. 2005) and marine environment (20 Oct. 2005) as well as soils, pesticides and the urban environment, which are upcoming.
Thematic strategies represent a modern way of decision-making. They are based
on extensive research and consultation with stakeholders, address the issues in
a holistic way that takes into account links with other problems and policy
areas, and promote Better Regulation.
See MEMO/05/496 for more details on this Strategy.
The full strategy is available at
A video news release on the strategies on resources and waste is available to television stations and networks free of charge at:

= B =
Used of human behavior, conveys that the
subject is busy waiting for someone or something, intends to move
instantly as soon as it shows up, and thus cannot do anything else
at the moment. "Can't talk now, I'm busy-waiting till Bill gets
off the phone."
Technically, `busy-wait' means to wait on an event by
spinning through a tight or timed-delay loop that polls for
the event on each pass, as opposed to setting up an interrupt
handler and continuing execution on another part of the task. In
applications this is a wasteful technique, and best avoided on
time-sharing systems where a busy-waiting program may hog the
processor. However, it is often unavoidable in kernel programming.
In the Linux world, kernel busy-waits are usually referred to as
--The Jargon File version 4.3.1, ed. ESR, autonoded by rescdsk.

Old name for the Middle East
ern area which is now Israel
, supposedly derived from "Philistine
," a biblical-era name for a part of the region.
In 1948 a United Nations mandate divided the area between Arabs and Jews -- the Palestinian leaders and leaders of surrounding countries (who were all Arabs) did not accept this and have several times since then invaded or attacked Israeli territory. In the process of fighting back, Israel actually gained about 80% of the territory originally divided about equally between the two groups. The Gaza Strip and the West Bank are some of these areas; they are now partially ruled by the Palestinians native to the areas but are still overall under Israeli control. Many Palestinians, both those who've left the area and those who've stayed, are part of resistance movements with the goal of regaining some or all of the territory once called Palestine back from Israel.

Woodrow Wilson, as described in the introductory section of the text, was the leader of the immediate post-war period and was the architect of an internationalist vision for a new world order. Yet, as discussed in the paragraphs below, he was not able to persuade the other Allied leaders at the peace settlement negotiations in Paris to embrace his vision. But it was not just the opposition of Clemenceau and Lloyd George to some of his ideas that moved the conference away from Wilson's vision. Wilson became so blindingly caught up in his vision, thinking that everything he advocated was what democracy and justice wanted, that he completely alienated the other negotiators in Paris, and they stopped listening to him. Another historian points to a different problem, that Wilson himself stopped listening to his earlier vision, having become convinced that a harsh peace was justified and desirable. Even if that historical view is accurate, Wilson was probably still more moderate in his conception of a harsh peace than were Clemenceau and Lloyd George. But as the conference dragged on and the departure from Wilsonianism became more and more pronounced, Wilson clung to his proposal for the League of Nations. In fact, he seemed to place all his faith in his pet project, believing it would solve all the evils the negotiators were unable to solve during the conference. Unfortunately, Wilson made it clear that the League was his primary objective, and it came to be his only bargaining chip. He then compromised on numerous issues that had no corollary in his vision in order to maintain the support for the creation of the League. Thus, though full of good intentions and a vision for a just and peaceful future, Wilson's arrogance and ineffective negotiating skills largely contibuted to the downfall of his vision. Finally, it must be mentioned that Wilson's inability to negotiate with the Senate in its discussion of the ratification of the Treaty of Versailles caused the Senate to reject the Treaty, leaving the United States noticeably absent from the newly created League of Nations, which greatly undermined the effectiveness and importance of Wilson's principal goal. Nonetheless, Wilson was awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to secure a lasting peace and the success in the creation of the League of Nations.
David Lloyd George, the British Prime Minister,
entered the negotiations in Paris with the clear support of the British
people, as evidenced by his convincing win in the so-called khaki election
of December 1918.
During the weeks leading up to the election, though, he had publicly committed
himself to work for a harsh peace against Germany, including obtaining
payments for war damages committed against the British. These campaign
promises went against Lloyd George's personal convictions. Knowing
that Germany had been Britain's best pre-war trading partner, he thought
that Britain's best chance to return to its former prosperity was to restore
Germany to a financially stable situation, which would have required a
fairly generous peace with respect to the vanquished enemy.
Nonetheless, his campaign statements showed Lloyd George's understanding
that the public did not hold the same convictions as he did, and that,
on the contrary, the public wanted to extract as much as possible out of
the Germans to compensate them for their losses during the war. So
Lloyd George and Clemenceau were in agreement on many points, each one
seeming to support the other in their nationalist objectives, and thereby
scratching each other's back as the "game of grab" of Germany's power played
itself out. But most historians do not attribute to Lloyd George
a significant role in the Treaty negotiations.
In their defense, Clemenceau and Lloyd George were only following popular sentiment back home when they fought for harsh terms against Germany. It is clear from historical accounts of the time that after seeing so many young men not return from the trenches on the Western front, the French and British wanted to exact revenge against the Germans through the peace settlement, to ensure that their families would never again be destroyed by German aggression. In that respect, democracy was clearly functioning as it is intended in a representative democracy. In fact, Lloyd George is the quintessential example of an elected leader serving the interests of his people, putting his personal convictions second to British public opinion. Yet it was that same public opinion (in France and Britain) that Wilson had believed would support his internationalist agenda, placing Germany in the context of a new and more peaceful world order which would prevent future aggression. Wilson's miscalculation was one of the single greatest factors leading to the compromise of his principles and the resulting harsh and, in the eyes of many, unjust treatment of Germany within the Treaty of Versailles.
[See also the biographies of the Big Three listed
on the Links
1. James L. Stokesbury, A Short History of World War I, 1981, p. 309.
2. Manfred F. Boemeke, "Woodrow Wilson's Image of Germany, the War-Guilt Question, and the Treaty of Versailles,"inThe Treaty of Versailles: A Reassessment After 75 Years, Ch. 25, Boemeke, Feldman & Glaser, eds., 1998, pp. 603-614.
3. Robert H. Ferrell, Woodrow Wilson and World War I: 1917-1921, 1985, p. 146.
4. Lawrence E. Gelfand, "The American Mission to Negotiate Peace: An Historian Looks Back," in The Treaty of Versailles: A Reassessment After 75 Years, Ch. 8, Boemeke, Feldman & Glaser, eds., 1998, p. 191.
5. See Ferrell, supra note 3, Ch. 10, "The Senate and the Treaty."
6. Information from this paragraph is taken from Ferrell, supra note 3, at 142, 144, 151.
7. Id. at 151.
8. Stokesbury, supra note 1, at 311-312.

Children are willing to ask one parent and then the next to get the desired answer. Parental communication is key to combating this divisive strategy.
Children determine from an early age which parent they should ask for permission in which circumstance. I can illustrate this with the example of my own family. If the request involved some degree of daring, risk, or danger, they always approached Dad, the one more likely to allow a bareback ride on the horse or a run down a black diamond ski slope.
When it came to social events, they made the intelligent choice to come to Mom. I am — and always have been — more of a social butterfly than dear old Dad. This division of labor in regard to granting permission is logical and harmless. The problems begin when a child asks one parent, is denied permission, and then asks the other parent, looking for an override of the first ruling — Divide and Conquer.
If this is allowed in your family, it will definitely be disruptive. When Divide and Conquer is successful, Mom and Dad find themselves distracted and in conflict with each other. That leaves the child free to disregard the first parent’s decision.
To combat the Divide and Conquer strategy, you need to communicate. Find out if there has been an initial answer given to your child’s request. If the other parent has already responded, it is best to let the first answer hold. If you find that the two of you are continually disagreeing, it would be best to simply address your child’s request by saying, “Your Dad and I will have to talk about it.” It is always good to have a united front or, as I like to say, to be singing off the same songsheet.
For Your Reflection:
Have you ever been the victim of a Divide and Conquer strategy?

United States Naturalization and Citizenship
From FamilySearch Wiki
|Line 286:||Line 286:|
<u>'''Town of Origin'''</u>
<u>'''Town of Origin'''</u>
Most researchers hope to find the town of origin in naturalization records. This information usually is listed in naturalization records
Most researchers hope to find the town of origin in naturalization records. This information usually is listed in naturalization records when the forms were standardized. the country of origin is only listed and the town not normally given. However, because each court recorded different information prior to 1906, it is important to search naturalization records.
Prior to 1906, each court created their own naturalization forms. Each form was different, so information recorded on the form differed. You may find substantial information in one court (date and place of immigration, age of applicant) and
Prior to 1906, each court created their own naturalization forms. Each form was different, so information recorded on the form differed. You may find substantial information in one court (date and place of immigration, age of applicant) andinformation (country of origin) in another court.
[http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis/menuitem.5af9bb95919f35e66f614176543f6d1a/?vgnextchannel=d21f3711ca5ca110VgnVCM1000004718190aRCRD&vgnextoid=8d6bfd262fa4b110VgnVCM1000004718190aRCRD Visa ], required from 1924 to 1944, is the only naturalization record to the immigrant’s parents' names. Copies of [http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis/menuitem.5af9bb95919f35e66f614176543f6d1a/?vgnextchannel=d21f3711ca5ca110VgnVCM1000004718190aRCRD&vgnextoid=8d6bfd262fa4b110VgnVCM1000004718190aRCRD visa files] can only be obtained from the [https://wiki.familysearch.org/en/United_States_Naturalization_and_Citizenship USCIS.]<br>
=== Exceptions to the Naturalization Process<br> ===
=== Exceptions to the Naturalization Process<br> ===
Revision as of 16:08, 10 August 2010
- United States U.S. Naturalizations
Most Popular Websites for Naturalization Records
Why Use This Record?
Naturalization is the process of granting citizenship privileges and responsibilities to foreign-born residents. Naturalization papers are an important source of information about an immigrant's nation of origin, his foreign and “Americanized” names, residence, and date of arrival.
Immigrants to the United States have never been required to apply for citizenship. An immigrant could become a citizen anytime after they arrived in the United States. Of those who applied, many did not complete the requirements to become a citizen.
Before 1906, the information recorded on naturalization records differed widely. Naturalization records before 1906 are not likely to give town of origin or names of parents. However, naturalization records after 1906 contain more information than earlier records. Information in post-1906 records is more detailed and may include birth dates, birth places, and other immigration information about the immigrant and members of his family.
Before 1906, naturalization records may contain:
- Port of arrival
- Date of arrival
- Age of immigrant
- Residence of immigrant
- Country of origin or allegiance
In 1906, the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization was created.  (Later called Immigration and Naturalization Services or INS.) The result was standardized forms throughout the country and a copy of the naturalization papers sent to the INS in addition to the court keeping a copy.
After 1906, naturalization records may contain:
- Birth date & place of immigrant
- Spouse & children
- Birth dates and places for spouse & children
- Port of arrival
- Date of arrival
- Vessel of arrival
- Physical Description
- Marriage date
- Last Foreign Address
- Marital status
Naturalization records began in Colonia times. The requirements and process of naturalization have changed many times over the years. The basic requirements have been residency in the country for a given period of time, good moral character, and an oath of loyalty or allegiance given in a court of record.
Colonial Naturalization (Pre-1790)
British immigrants were automatically citizens of the colonies (British Empire). A few Protestant immigrants from other countries gave oaths of allegiance or appeared before a civil authority to request citizenship (a process sometimes referred to as denization). Seven of the original colonies had their own laws for naturalizing foreigners as citizens of the British Empire colony. After the Revolutionary War, the individual states established their own naturalization laws and procedures.
Types of Colonial Naturalization
- Denization--A type of naturalization used to obtain land. You could buy and sell land, but could not hold public office. There were no political privileges associated with denization.
- Oath of Allegiance--This type of naturalization during the colonial period was used to renounce all former country loyalties. This gave the immigrant full privileges, including voting and holding public office.
- Collective citizenship--This naturalization process was used to naturalize a group of people without using documents. Collective naturalization happened when the United States became a country in 1776 and all those living in the country (except Native Americans and African Americans) were collectively and automatically made US citizens.
Naturalization From 1790-1906
The first naturalization law was enacted in 1790. Over the years, naturalization laws changed numerous times, but generally speaking the process required a Declaration of Intention and a Petition to be filed to become a citizen (Except during the years 1798 to 1828. see Report and Registry listed below). After 1906, several other documents were created during the naturalization process.
The immigrant also had to be a resident in the United States 5 years and a 1 year resident in the the state before becoming a citizen. In 1795, there was a 3 year waiting period, later changed to 2 years in 1824, between filing the declaration and the petition.
The naturalization process is completed in a court of law. The process usually required several steps to complete and various documents related to naturalization may be found in the court records described below.
The typical naturalization process involved three steps:
- Declaration of Intention. The immigrant filed a declaration of intention (also called first papers) to renounce allegiance to foreign governments and to later prove he or she had resided in the country long enough to apply for citizenship. Residency laws changed consistently over time ranging from no residency requirement (meaning they could declare right after they "came off the boat") to 14 years residency. However, generally speaking, an immigrant filed a declaration of intention up to two years after he immigrated to the United States. The immigrant could declare any time after he arrived after fulfilling the residency requirement. Some immigrants waited as late as 20 years after coming to the United States to begin the process to become a citizen. There are some exceptions to the naturalization process where the immigrant was not required to file a declaration.
- Petition. The immigrant had to wait anywhere between one to three years after he filed his declaration to file his petition for citizenship (also called second or final papers). Most often the petition was filed in a court nearest to the town where the immigrant settled. An Oath of Allegiance was also signed to pledge the immigrants allegiance to the Untied States and sign a written oath.
- Certificate. After all requirements were completed, the immigrant was sworn in as a citizen and issued his or her certificate. The certificate is given from the same court the petition is filed in. It is called the Certificate of Citizenship or Certificate of Naturalization.
Report and Registry, 1798-1828
From 1798 to 1828, a new immigrant was required to appear before a local court and register his arrival in the United States. This was usually recorded in the court minutes. Sometimes a separate document, a report and registry or aliens' register was created instead. The immigrant could obtain a certificate showing that he had registered in order to prove his residency later when he applied for citizenship. The Report and Registry could take place at a different time and different court than the immigrant's declaration.
The Report and Registry may include the following information depending on the court recording the information:
- Name of immigrant
- Nation of allegiance
- County of migration
- Place of intended settlement
Naturalization After 1906
When the INS was created in 1906, other naturalization records were created to process naturalizations and keep track of immigrants in the United States. Copies of these documents are only in the possession of the former INS, now United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). A summary of some of these documents are listed below:
- Certificate of Arrival, 1906 to the present--After 1906 an immigrant was required to submit a certificate of arrival when he petitioned for citizenship in order to prove the length of his residency. This document gives the place of entry, manner of arrival, and date of arrival. This was kept in the file with the petition.
- Certificate of Registry--A certificate created by the INS to document immigrants who arrived prior to July 1, 1924 to the United States where no original arrival record could not be located.
- Visa and Application--Began with the Immigration Act of 1924. All aliens had to have a Visa to enter the United States. Visas were obtained at US Embassies and Consulates abroad. Visa Files contain birth information, parents, children, previous residence and a photograph beginning in 1929.
- Alien Registration--The Alien Registration Act of 1940 required that every non-citizen of the United States, age 14 years and up, had to register and fill out the Alien Registration form. The Alien Registration Program created a specific form, AR-2, for this program and forms were created from 1 Aug 1940 to 31 Mar 1944 during World War II. All original alien registration forms were microfilmed and are at the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. The originals were destroyed after filming.
- An alien registration form contains the following information:
- Name at time of entry to the US
- Other names used
- Date of Birth
- Marital Status
- Height & Weight
- Hair & Eye Color
- Port, date, ship, and class of admission at last arrival in US
- Date of first arrival in US
- Years lived in US
- Intended stay in US
- Usual occupation
- Present occupation
- Present employer, including address
- Club, organization, or society memberships
- Military service (Country, branch, dates)
- Date and number of Declaration of Intention (if filed), and city and State where filed
- Date of Petition for Naturalization (if filed), and city and State where filed
- Arrest history
- Date and place of registration
Naturalization Records by State
Locating Naturalization Records
By Time Period - What to Know Before Searching
Colonial Naturalization Records (Pre-1790)
Naturalization records before 1790 differ vastly from later naturalization records. Colonial naturalizations consist mostly of lists of those that took the oath of allegience. The colony where the immigrant was living had jurisdiction over naturalizations.
A good source to begin searching for colonial naturalization records is William P. Filby's Passenger and Immigration Lists Index, 1500s- 1900s. This source has indexed published passenger lists as well as early published naturalization records. Passenger and Immigration Lists Index, 1500s- 1900s includes the original sources where the information came from.
Passenger and Immigration Lists Index, 1500s- 1900s is available in book form, CD-ROM, and Ancestry.com. There are several sets and supplements that have been added to the original publication. The most current supplement, 2009 is in book form and not included in the CD-ROM or Ancestry.com database.
Records Between 1790 and September 1906
An immigrant may have completed naturalization proceedings through any of 5,000 federal, state, or local courts that had the authority to grant citizenship. Naturalization proceedings were most often completed in county, superior or common pleas courts, or in state and U.S. circuit and district courts. Because some municipal, police, criminal, probate, and other courts also provided this service, you may need to search the records of all local courts.
You may need to search the records of each place where your immigrant ancestor lived to locate both naturalization records. He may have filed the declartion of intention in one court in one state and filed the petition several years later in another court and state. Begin first by looking for naturalization records in the courts of the county or city where the immigrant settled. Most likely the petition (second papers) was filed in that county or city.
Records Since September 1906
Beginning in September 1906, the federal government began regulating the naturalization process. The Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization (now the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services or USCIS) required specific forms for declarations and petitions. Only these forms could be used and the Bureau controlled the number of courts able to naturalize by controlling distribution of the forms. However, both state and federal courts were allowed to naturalize.
The Declaration of Intent (Form 2202) was completed in triplicate. The court kept the original and gave copies to the applicant and the Bureau. The applicant was to use the declaration to apply for the petition. If the declaration is still in possession of the family, the immigrant probably did not complete the process and was not a citizen. The Petition for Naturalization (Form 2204) was kept by the court and a duplicate was sent to the INS. The Certificate of Naturalization (Form 2207) was given to the new citizen and a stub of the Certificate was kept in the court to prove it was issued. A duplicate of the petition was sent to the INS.
In 1929 the INS changed the forms and required photographs of the applicants. Because the new forms were not distributed immediately, many state courts ceased naturalizing. However, naturalizations were still taking place in local county courts as well as federal courts and the records of any court still naturalizing should be consulted to locate your ancestor's records.
Finding Naturalization Records
Immigrants could naturalize in any court that performed naturalizations. That included city, county, state and federal courts. After 1906, federal courts naturalized many immigrants, however, other local courts continued to naturalize as late as 1985. Check all possible courts in the area your ancestor lived.
Begin by looking for naturalization records in the courts of the county or city where the immigrant lived. Look first for the petition (second papers), because they are usually easier to find in courts near where the immigant eventually settled. After 1906, the declaration can be filed with the petition as the immigrant was required to submit a copy when he submitted the petition.
Because immigrants were allowed to naturalize in any court, they often selected the most convenient court. If they lived in New Jersey but worked in New York City, also check the courts of New York City for the naturalization records. If an immigrant lived on the border of a county, they may have naturalized in the adjacent county because the courthouse may have been closer.
Locating the Correct District Court
One federal court that may contain your ancestor's naturalization records is the District Court. However, to search the these records you must first determine the correct district court. Click on United States District Court Jurisdictions to help you identify the correct District Court. You must know the county your ancestor resided in.
On the Internet
There are many online resources available for researching naturalization records. These online resources include naturalization indexes as well as digital images of naturalization records.
- Online Searchable Naturalization Indexes and Records--This website contains links to naturalization indexes and records. It is arranged by state and gives the statewide indexes and records first. It then gives the countywide indexes and records. This website is updated regularly and is a great source to begin searching for naturalization records on the Internet.
- Footnote.com--This website has a partnership with the National Archives to bring digital images of some of the National Archives collections online. Part of the website is free, other images are only available through a subscription. Free access is given to the website at the National Archives, at National Archives regional branches, and at Family History Centers that have Internet access. To locate naturalization databases on footnote.com, choose the "browse all" link. Under the category list, click on Naturalizations 1700s - Mid 1900s. At the bottom of the screen, use the "search within" box to type in a name. There is also an "advanced search" option that helps narrow down common names when more information is known about the ancestor.
- Ancestry.com--This is a subscription website. Most of Ancestry's naturalization records are found under the heading Immigration and Emigration. You can access these records by the following methods:
- 1) Ancestry Database Card Catalog--type the word naturalization in the Database Title Box. This will give you a listing of naturalization records.
- Olive Tree Genealogy Naturalizations--Free access to many indexes. Some are submitted by Olive Tree Genealogy(OTG) volunteers.
- United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS)--After 1906, a copy of all naturalization records were sent to the Immigration and Naturalization Service or INS, now called the USCIS. You may access their records through the USCIS Genealogy Program. Their website is www.uscis.gov. More details are listed below under, Using the Genealogy Program at the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
At the Family History Library
Naturalization records at the library are listed in the Place Search of the Family History Library Catalog under one of the following:
[STATE] - NATURALIZATION AND CITIZENSHIP
[STATE], [COUNTY] - NATURALIZATION AND CITIZENSHIP
[STATE], [COUNTY], [TOWN] - NATURALIZATION AND CITIZENSHIP
The library has also acquired large collections of naturalization records from the National Archives branches in Atlanta, Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, and Seattle.
In some states, naturalization records are included in other court records and are not separately identified. The state research outlines will help you locate these records.
A key reference book is:
• Schaefer, Christina K. Guide to Naturalization Records in the United States. Baltimore, Maryland: Genealogical Publishing Company, 1997. (FHL book 973 P4s.) It identifies records at both the National Archives and the Family History Library. It also describes many state and county courthouse collections. This book was published in 1997 and has not been updated. The Family History Library has added naturalization records to their collection since the publication.
At Regional Archives and other Repositories
The clerk of the court where the immigrant was naturalized may still have the original records. Some copies of court naturalization records have been transferred to National Archives regional branches. Check these Regional Branches for Federal Court Records as they charge less than the USCIS.
National Archive regional branches have websites that often state which naturalization records they have available. To locate the regional branch covering the location of the court where the naturalization document was filed, click here.
Using the Genealogy Program at the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) has instituted the Genealogy Program for public access to all records from 1906 to 1956 created by this agency, formerly Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). Review the Genealogy Frequently Asked Questions website to expedite your order and ensure success for your request.
- Certificate Files (C-files) from September 27, 1906 to April 1, 1956
- Alien Registration Forms from August 1, 1940 to March 31, 1944
- Visa files from July 1, 1924 to March 31, 1944
- Registry Files from March 2, 1929 to March 31, 1944
- Alien Files (A-files) numbered below 8 million (A8000000) and documents therein dated prior to May 1, 1951
When ordering by mail, use forms G-1041 (for an index search) and G-1041A (for obtaining the record). Do not submit G-1041A until you have completed a search with form G-1041 UNLESS you have a valid file number. Once the form is filled out, include a money order or cashier's check. Cash or a personal check will not be accepted. There are NO refunds for incorrect file numbers submitted or for negative results. The mailing address is:
- USCIS Genealogy Program
P.O. Box 805925
Chicago, Illinois 60680-4120
The fee schedule is:
Form G-639, the FOIA form will still be used for naturalization records created after 1956.
Determining if your Ancestor Naturalized
Before you search for your ancestor’s naturalization records, you should have an idea of when they immigrated to the United States.
Evidence that an immigrant became a citizen can be found in censuses, court minutes, homestead records, passports, voting registers, and military papers. Even if an immigrant ancestor did not complete the process and become a citizen, he may have begun the process and filed a declaration of intention
If your immigrant lived until after 1900, you should locate them on as many censuses as you can.
Census Records – 1900 to 1930
The 1900, 1910, 1920, and 1930 Censuses each ask the year an immigrant arrived to the United States. It also asks if the individual was naturalized or not. The codes for naturalization are as follows:
- PA: The individual began the naturalized process and has submitted a declaration of intention.
- NA: The individual has completed the naturalization process and is a US Citizen.
- AL: The immigrant had not yet naturalized or even begun the process. Not every immigrant naturalized.
- NR: The census taker did not report the citizenship information.
The 1920 Census also asks the year the individual naturalized. The 1920 Census is the only year this question is asked.
Certificate of Naturalization or Certificate of Citizenship:
It is helpful to know if your ancestor naturalized. Documents found in your family’s possession may indicate if your ancestor naturalized. One document you may find in your family's possession is a Certificate of Naturalization or Certificate of Citizenship. This document indicates that your ancestor completed the process, and was a naturalized citizen of the United States. The certificate also states the court where the petition was filed. This helps locate a copy of the petition, which can contain more information about the immigrant.
If your ancestor had a United States passport, your ancestor completed the naturalization process and was a US Citizen. Passports were only given to U.S. citizens. They were and was not required for travel outside of the United States during times of war. Often newly naturalized citizens would obtain passports to keep them from being drafted in their native country's military. For more information about United States Passports, click here.
Tips for Success
For success in finding naturalization records and obtaining the information desired, remember that there are limitations in naturalization records, exceptions to the naturalization process and search strategies that should be used such as checking spelling variations.
Town of Origin
Most researchers hope to find the town of origin in naturalization records. This information usually is listed in naturalization records after 1906 when the forms were standardized. Before 1906, often the country of origin is only listed and the town not normally given. However, because each court recorded different information prior to 1906, it is important to search the earlier naturalization records.
Prior to 1906, each court created their own naturalization forms. Each form was different, so information recorded on the form differed. You may find substantial information in one court (date and place of immigration, age of applicant, place of birth) and very little information (name of aaplicant, country of origin) in another court. Thus, it is important to always obtain the naturalization records of an immigrant even if they naturalized before 1906.
Names of Parents
Exceptions to the Naturalization Process
There are exceptions to naturalization process that can determine whether you find a declaration of intention or a petition for your ancestor or not.
Immigrant children - even today - receive their citizenship from their parents. Starting in 1790, children recieved derivative citizenship from their father (or mother in some cases). Derivative citizenship is defined as getting one's citizenship from another person. When the child's father became naturalized, his children under 16 (or 18, depending on the year) automatically became citizenship. There was no paperwork that was created. To prove his or her citizenship, the child would need his or her father's certificate of citizenship (or certificate of naturalization).
Beginning in 1824 until 1906, immigrants under the age of 21 (whose parents did not naturalize) could be naturalized without filing a declaration of intent after they reached the age of 21 and had met the residency requirements. The declaration was often submitted with the petition.
In 1855, derivative citizenship (obtaining one's citizenship from another person) was also available for immigrant women marrying US citizens or if their husbands obtained their citizenship during their marriage. The wife's proof that she was a US citizen was her husband's certificate of citizenship (or certificate of naturalization) and her marriage certificate.
In 1922, citizenship was no longer available to women through marriage. However, between 1907 to 1922, a woman could lose her US citizenship if she married an alien - even if she was born in the United States. For more information, read Marion L. Smith's article, Women and Naturalization, ca. 1802-1940.
To serve in the United States military, one did not need to be a United States citizen - even today. In fact, the United States Government passed some naturalization laws to help encourage new immigrants to serve in the military in their new homeland. These laws made becoming a naturalized citizen easier for the immigrant. The following are the laws concerning service in the military:
Army--Beginning in 1862, the Declaration was waived, and the residency requirement was reduced to one year, for a soldier with an honorable discharge.
Navy & Marines--Beginning in 1894, with an honorable discharge, the Declaration was waived and the residency requirement was reduced to one year.
World War I--In 1918, during WWI, the residency requirement was waived and the Declaration was also waived. Soldiers are naturalized at military posts.
In some instances, entire groups have been collectively granted U.S. citizenship. Collective naturalization is defined as a group of people all receiving their citizenship through an act of congress or treaty. In these cases you will not find individual naturalization papers.
In 1868, African-Americans made citizens by the Fourteenth Amendment of the Unites States Constitution. In 1924, Native Americans made finally made citizens - although some chiefs of tribes became citizens before this date. The Native Americans were not included in the Fouteeneth Amendment because they were considered a seperate nation.
Collective naturalization also occurred for residents of the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, Texas in 1845, and Hawaii in 1898.
Search all spellings of the surname. Think about how the surname was pronounced, and how it sounded in your ancestor's probable accent. The surname may be spelled differently in earlier records that were closer to your ancestor's immigration date.
Other Naturalization Topics
There are over 150 US naturalization laws that have been enacted since 1790. These laws change the residency requirements and those that qualified for naturalization. A summary of some of the major naturalization acts passed by congress can be found here.
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services has a full discussion of all naturalization laws in PDF format.
- ↑ 1.0 1.1 Schaefer, Christina K. Guide to Naturalization Records of the United States (Baltimore, MD: Christina K. Schaefer, 1997).
- ↑ 2.0 2.1 Newman, John J. American Naturalization Records 1790-1990. (Bountiful, UT: Heritage Quest, 1998).
- ↑ United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, :Alien Registration Forms on Microfilm, 1940-1944
- ↑ Greenwood, Val D. The Researcher's Guide to American Genealogy, 3rd ed. (Baltimore, MD: Genealogical Publishing Co., Inc., 2000)

Reports of a serious amount of corn planted in central and southern Illinois, and at least a sprinkling of acres planted in Indiana before the first official day of Spring has some people scratching their heads. Try to explain that to your grandfather or great-grandfather!
Emerson Nafziger at the University of Illinois says it may mean this is an educational season because he can't remember this much corn planted so early. He also says that in all test results he can find, corn planted the last week of April typically slightly out yields corn planted in late March of early April.
Other universities have shown similar data. However, Nafziger acknowledges it depends upon the weather conditions that come after planting and the year itself.
Here's what we think is often left out of the equation, especially for farmers with large acreages to plant. While the data is what it is for late-April being an ideal planting time in the central Midwest, few people add this caveat. What if soil conditions are right now, and temperatures are right now, but it's too wet or too cool to plant the last week of April? What if the last week of April becomes the first week of May? During the past two seasons in much of Indiana, for example, the last week of April became the last week of May or the first two weeks of June.
One could argue that the proper comparison ought to be not the first of April planting vs. the last of April, but the first of April planting vs. planting the last week of May? Which corn is likely to yield more? Most university data and data form several seed companies, including Beck's Hybrids through their Practical Farm Research Demonstration plots, would say that anything planted in April has a higher percentage of yielding more than corn planted the last week of May.
Given that logic, who can blame someone who has watched their planter sit for four weeks straight in May for the past two years if they want to get some crop in the ground now? Of course if fair weather continues or if the last week of April is ideal, and you could guarantee that, it would make a difference. Farming doesn't come with guarantees.
Ken Scheeringa, an assistant climatologist at Purdue University, says warmer than normal weather is likely through April, although it may not be as extreme on the warm side as in March, as compared to normal. Rainfall is more of a fuzzy call. The real issue is that May and June aren't on the radar screen yet. Some who have ventured out into May still call for a cool, wet spring.
So is it wise or foolish to have corn planted now? It's your decision, and your money. For our money, it's a gamble either way. Perhaps experts should talk in terms of calculated risks and explain what-if scenarios when they lay out planting date options.

Sheep & Wolf to join forces?
BirdLife International and FACE (the Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU) have signed a historic agreement recognising that the conservation of bird species and their habitats is a common objective. Both organisations agree that the Birds Directive is the appropriate instrument for bird conservation in the European Union, and undertake not to attempt to change it. Both recognise the importance of the Natura 2000 network, which includes all the Special Protection Areas for birds required under the Birds Directive. They also agree to cooperate in promoting strategic conservation priorities, such as halting biodiversity decline by 2010, protecting sites, and reforming the Common Agricultural Policy.
The Agreement, signed on 12
October by Mike Rands, Director and Chief Executive of BirdLife International and Gilbert de Turckheim, President of FACE, was
welcomed and countersigned by Mrs Margot Wallstr?m, Commissioner for the Environment. Progress towards this agreement began in 2001,
when the European Commission launched the Sustainable Hunting Initiative (SHI) to create a constructive dialogue between
conservationists and hunters, represented by BirdLife International and FACE.
The SHI was started at a time when the two organisations could be considered arch-enemies, and constant confrontations on hunting issues seemed to be leading nowhere, said Dr Clairie Papazoglou, BirdLife`s Head of EU Policy. This Agreement proves that reasonable hunters and reasonable conservationists can work together for the benefit of birds and people. It represents an important step forward in the relations of the two organisations, which on the basis of this text can chart a list of common actions, to be carried out in the years to come. It can also be the basis on which BirdLife`s Partners can promote similar initiatives at the national level.
Created: 5th Nov 2004

COGNITIVE MORAL DEVELOPMENT AND LOEVINGER'S CONCEPT OF EGO DEVELOPMENT (KOHLBERG)
This study explored the nature of the relationship between cognitive moral development as defined by Lawrence Kohlberg and ego development as defined by Jane Loevinger. The effects of general cognitive development were controlled by the selection of subjects who were capable of formal operational thinking. Subjects were 120 Jewish volunteers comprised of equal numbers of junior high-school, senior high-school, and college students of both sexes. All subjects received three tests: A Screening Measure for Formal Operations, The Sentence Completion Test (SCT) which measures ego development, and The Moral Judgment Interview (MJI). Results indicated the existence of significant positive correlations between the SCT and MJI in the overall sample, in the total male and female samples, in the entire college group, and in the female college group. No significant correlations were found in the junior high-school and senior high-school groups, possibly due to restricted ranges of scores. In addition, most subjects at moral development stages 3/4 and above had attained at least the conscientious-conformist level. Results also indicated the presence of differences between male and female scores. The correlations for females were consistently higher than for males, females scored significantly higher on the SCT, males scored significantly higher on the MJI, and the relationship between specific moral and ego development stages seemed to be stronger for females than for males. The differences found in this study between the sexes in performance on the MJI are consistent with Gilligan's theory about the distinctions between male and female approaches to moral dilemmas. However, that theory was found to be inadequate in explaining the stronger relationship between MJI and SCT scores manifested by the females in this study. The SCT was criticized for not specifying clearly the ego development features that it measured. It was suggested that the exact nature of the interplay between moral and ego development could be illuminated more fully by research that focused on specific well-defined features of ego development. ^
"COGNITIVE MORAL DEVELOPMENT AND LOEVINGER'S CONCEPT OF EGO DEVELOPMENT (KOHLBERG)"
(January 1, 1984).
ETD Collection for Fordham University.

DWC is prone to Root Rot,
always due to low DO*Altitude
play an important role
in how much DO a solution can carry.
If you reduce your nute loads,
your solution can carry more DO.
If you live in Denver,
you may have a problem indoor growing
with any temps above 65ºf
If you check out Roseypanties experiment,
you will see he had much better result
using a reduced nute load.
There were two positive effects on the plants,
that were grown using the reduced nute load.
The first good thing that happened was,
his DO increased,
due to the reduced salinity,
of his nutrient solution.
Second, osmotic pressure was reduced in the rhyzome,
allowing the plant to take in more H2o
and thus grow faster.
What does this second statement really mean?
Take your hand,
and leave it in salt water for an hour.
Your skin wrinkles,... why?
Because the salt
has caused the osmotic pressure
on the outdside of your skin
to be higher than the pressure inside your skin,
and as the water in your hand
is sucked out through your skin,
your hand actually shrinks
from the loss of fluid
and the skin becomes loose
It is harder for your plant
to uptake water and nutrients
when you use high nute loads,
because the salt creates negative osmotic pressure (hypertonicity)
against the semipermeable membrane
of the root cell walls.
Here is the Wiki "scientific answer".
Osmotic pressure is the hydrostatic pressure
produced by a solution
in a space divided by a semipermeable membrane (your roots)
due to a differential in the concentrations of solute.
Osmoregulation is the homeostasis mechanism of an organism
to reach balance in osmotic pressure.
Osmotic potential is the opposite of water potential
with the former meaning
the degree to which a solvent (usually water)
would want to stay in a liquid
and not pass through the membrane.Hypertonicity
is a solution that causes cells to shrink.
It may or may not have a higher
osmotic pressure than the cell interior
since the rate of water entry will depend upon the permeability of the cell membrane.Hypotonicity
is a solution that causes cells to swell
It may or may not have a lower
osmotic pressure than the cell interior,
since the rate of water entry will depend upon the permeability of the cell membrane.Isotonic
is a solution that produces no change in cell volume.
(this is what you want your nute solution to be)
When a biological cell is in a hypotonic
the cell interior accumulates water,
water flows across the cell membrane into the cell,
causing it to expand.
In plant cells,
the cell wall restricts the expansion,
resulting in pressure on the cell wall
from within called turgor
like swollen ankles or hands,
are not as productive.)
If you are good at math,
and want to get your nute solution perfect,
the osmotic pressure of a dilute solution
can be calculated using this formula
i = the Van t Hoff factor
M = the molarity
R = the gas constant, where R = 0.08206 L · atm · mol-1 · K-1
T = the thermodynamic temperature (formerly called absolute temperature)
Note: the similarity of the above formula to the ideal gas law
and also that osmotic pressure is not dependent on particle charge.
This equation was derived by van 't Hoff.
Now doing this calculation would be nice
if there are any college math majors out there,
but I use this chart,
and it has worked well for me.
_____________________% of Nute Load
As you can see, 50-75% is very adequate,
and it has been my personal experience,
that I have improved yields
and better taste,
when I use the lower end of "Sufficient",
on that chart.

Hi Andy, welcome to Linux Mint
Programming with Python is fun, at least I think so. Many programs developed by Linux Mint are actually written in Python, like the Software Manager and Update Manager for example. So I hope you do pick it up, but most important is you have a good time and enjoy using Linux Mint
Google has a very basic Python class to get you started: https://developers.google.com/edu/python/
. The Hitchhiker's Guide To Python may be a nice resource along the way also: http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/index.html
. Another good resource is Learn Python The Hard Way, which throws you in the deep end but gets you going fast with the basics: http://learnpythonthehardway.org/book/
. You don't need much to get started, Gedit or Kate both already have syntax highlighting for Python source code, though you may want to look into a lightweight programmer's editor like Geany to get a little more productive as your programming skills grow (you can install it from the Software Manager; I recommend you also install geany-plugins for some extra tools). But there are plenty of other programmer's editors and IDEs suitable for use with Python.

Walking under the metal gate that reads “Arbeit Macht Frei” (“Work Brings Freedom”) is a seminal moment for visitors to Auschwitz — a chill-inducing passage into a place of death. It comes as some surprise, then, to learn that it was actually upon passing the ticket-takers’ booth in the parking lot that visitors entered what was the main complex of the concentration camp.
The communist government that took control of Auschwitz after the war altered the physical complex in innumerable unmarked ways, changes that were largely made to serve the story of the Holocaust told behind the Iron Curtain. In communist eastern Europe, the central narrative of the Holocaust was not the death of Jews; it was the story of communist resistance and fascist atrocity. As a result, the focus of the Auschwitz museum is the complex known as Auschwitz 1, where the bulk of Polish political prisoners were killed early in the war. In the communist incarnation of the museum, only two of the barracks in Auschwitz 1 were given over to a discussion of the Jews. That has broadened in the post-communist years, but there continues to be a very European focus on nationalism. The Dutch government was given a barrack where they tell a story of brave Dutch resistance; they do not mention that, aside from Poland, no country allowed a higher proportion of its Jews to be killed than the Netherlands.
The museological focus on Auschwitz 1, however, has the unintended effect of leaving the much more massive Birkenau complex — the center of mass extermination — in a relatively unadulterated state. Few spaces convey the physical enormity of Jewish death during the Holocaust like the fields of Birkenau, with the outlines of destroyed barracks stretching out over a vast desolate field. At the back of the Birkenau complex, the Soviets erected an abstract granite memorial that towers over the surroundings. It represents the Soviet story, which was always one of triumph, skipping as quickly as possible over the mourning stage. This effort to create a narrative, though, is overwhelmed by the remains of the two brick buildings nearby that held the gas chambers, now collapsing in on themselves.

there are several other differences
including different meaning for the symbols ( [
different rules for which symbols need escaping (they can't be the same as both standard posix and extended posix)
you should read the full documentation for PCRE before chaging any posix regex to use pcre.
Differences from POSIX regex
As of PHP 5.3.0, the POSIX Regex extension is deprecated. There are a number of differences between POSIX regex and PCRE regex. This page lists the most notable ones that are necessary to know when converting to PCRE.
- The PCRE functions require that the pattern is enclosed by delimiters.
- Unlike POSIX, the PCRE extension does not have dedicated functions for case-insensitive matching. Instead, this is supported using the i (PCRE_CASELESS) pattern modifier. Other pattern modifiers are also available for changing the matching strategy.
- The POSIX functions find the longest of the leftmost match, but PCRE stops on the first valid match. If the string doesn't match at all it makes no difference, but if it matches it may have dramatic effects on both the resulting match and the matching speed. To illustrate this difference, consider the following example from "Mastering Regular Expressions" by Jeffrey Friedl. Using the pattern one(self)?(selfsufficient)? on the string oneselfsufficient with PCRE will result in matching oneself, but using POSIX the result will be the full string oneselfsufficient. Both (sub)strings match the original string, but POSIX requires that the longest be the result.
add a note User Contributed Notes Differences from POSIX regex - [1 notes]
jasen at treshna dot com ¶
1 year ago

“Utopian” has almost become a put-down or a suggestion that one is being unrealistic, if not naive. But I would argue that socialists must be utopian, not in the sense of expecting fundamental change instantaneously, but in the sense of holding in their very being the deep desire for the realization of a world completely unlike our own. It is that for which generations have fought and it is that ideal that has kept many a freedom fighter going despite tremendous adversities.
What is especially interesting about the history of capitalism is that with its rise there also emerged the impulse towards alternatives. These alternatives were not necessarily elaborated as eloquently as were the theories behind capitalism and, specifically, democratic capitalism, but they were nevertheless important. The oppressive and often criminal nature of rising capitalism brought with it revolutionary movements that challenged either the system itself or components of the system. These revolts took various forms, such as the slave revolts that spanned the entire period of the African slave trade.
Peter Linebaugh’s The Many-Headed Hydra: Sailors, Slaves, Commoners, and the Hidden History of the Revolutionary Atlantic offers a glimpse into the world of the North Atlantic and the development of capitalism. It was a world of significant resistance carried out by men and women; slaves and the free; mutinies and worker conspiracies. And in most cases there was a deep desire, sometimes elaborated, toward a not-always-defined freedom from the exploitation and oppression that accompanies capitalism.
With this as a backdrop, one can see that the desire for a utopia has always been a component of progressive and revolutionary anti-capitalism. Utopia was not simply a dream, but it represented the ideological and spiritual outlines of the ideal alternative. It became something for which movements fought. For many, that utopia took the name “socialism.”
In the 19th century, there were two diametrically opposed approaches to the question of socialism. On the one hand, there were the formations of local communities based on ideal socialist principles, such as equality and shared work. These were generally referenced as examples of “utopian socialism.” These communities attempted to live side-by-side with capitalism, hoping to demonstrate a viable alternative. Yet in their failure to tackle the system itself, these communities were strangled by the ever-growing amoral beast of capitalism.
In contrast, there were revolutionary movements, initially based in Europe, that sought to gain power for workers through struggle. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels were only two of those associated with this approach. These movements also co-existed (and usually not very well) with revolutionary anarchists who envisioned the immediate end of not only capitalism, but any governmental/state system.
It was also during the 19th century that the first great experiment in the creation of a worker’s state took place during the short-lived Paris Commune of 1871. This urban uprising of the dispossessed shook the world and suggested that worker power was more than a slogan.
The 20th century was the moment for the great socialist experiments, beginning with the Russian/Soviet Revolution in October 1917, and continuing on with China, Vietnam, Cuba and numerous other locales. Time and space do not permit anything approaching an exhaustive look at the twists and turns of the socialist experiments of the last century and the many conclusions that we could draw. For the purposes of this essay, let us say that revolutionary transformation proved to be far more difficult than the overthrow of a particular state structure.
Among other things, capitalism is not simply about a ruling class of capitalists, but about toxic practices, many of them day-to-day, which people have learned over generations and, as the great Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci would say, have come to be accepted as “common sense.” These practices and expectations operate like the ghostly hands of demons in a graveyard reaching out and placing often unexpected constraints on the ability to break free of such haunted spaces.
We also discovered that socialism was about far more than economics. It must be about the expansion of democracy and the actual control over the lives of working people by the workers themselves. This means that there will be mistakes, setbacks, and detours. But the people themselves need to take these on, since there is no omnipotent individual or organization that can ensure success in a process that knows no guarantees.
Socialism, then, is not a utopia but a step in a process that takes us in the direction of an idea- that is, a society free of all exploitation and oppression, and with the elimination of all oppressing and oppressed classes. For me, it is summarized not in the text of a great socialist treatise, but, ironically perhaps, in the words of a fictional character, Captain Jean Luc Picard of the starship Enterprise, in the film Star Trek: First Contact. In explaining to someone from the 21st century the economics of the 24th century, he says, “The acquisition of wealth is no longer the driving force in our lives. We work to better ourselves…and the rest of humanity.”
Such an era, however, is a very long way off, and humanity will have to earn admission to that new historical epoch through the trials and tribulations associated with transforming the way that we live our lives and the way that we treat the planet.
Each day we must struggle to get one step closer.
This post is also available in: Spanish

Correlation and Application of Statistics to Problems of Heredity 63
Oxford, and the three last were two men who committed suicide under circumstances of great disgrace and Palmer, the Rugeley murderer, who was hanged. There is possibly little knowledge to be obtained from the result for a single medical school, but comparative statistics for several would be of considerable value.
Chapter V deals with Normal Variability, and Galton shows how the distribution depends only on the two constants, the median and the quartile, and further that if two individuals whose grades are known be actually measured, then the median and quartile, and so the whole distribution of variation, can be discovered (p. 62, footnote, and cf. our Vol. II, p. 385). The origin of the normal distribution is illustrated mechanically by aid of the " quincunx " (see our pp. 9 and 10). Nor is Galton able to avoid becoming poetically enthusiastic in a paragraph headed The Charms of Statistics, for he writes
"It is difficult to understand why statisticians commonly limit their inquiries to averages and do not revel in more comprehensive views. Their souls seem as dull to the charm of variety as that of the native of one of our flat English counties, whose retrospect of Switzerland was that, if its mountains could be thrown into its lakes, two nuisances would be got rid of at once. An average is but a solitary fact, whereas if a single other fact be added to it, an entire Normal Scheme, which nearly corresponds to the observed one, starts potentially into existence.
"Some people hate the very name of statistics, but I find them full of beauty and interest. Whenever they are not brutalised, but delicately handled by the higher methods, and are warily interpreted, their power of dealing with complicated phenomena is extraordinary. They are the only tools by which an opening can be cut through the formidable thicket of difficulties that bars the path of those who pursue the Science of Man." (pp. 62-63.)
Galton at the end of his Chapter V gives the two fundamental propositions on which his normal surface for the distribution of characters in two relatives depends. He envisages it in the following manner.
"(1) Bullets are fired by a man who aims at the centre of a target, which we will call its 11f, and we will suppose the marks that the bullets make to be painted red, for the sake of distinction. The system of lateral deviations of these red marks from the centre M will be approximately Normal, whose Q [Probable Error] we will call c. [This is the distribution of the first relative.] Then another man takes aim, not at the centre of the target, but at one or other of the red marks, selecting these at random. We will suppose his shots to be painted green. The lateral distance of any green shot from the red mark at which it was aimed will have a Probable Error, that we will call b. Now if the lateral distance of a particular green mark from M is given [a], what is the most probable distance from M of the red mark at which it was aimed?
It is + b2 a*.
"(2) What is the Probable Error of this determination? In other words, if estimates have been made for a great many distances founded upon the formula in (1), they would be correct on the average, though erroneous in particular cases. The errors thus made would form a normal
system whose Q [Probable Error] it is desired to determine. Its value is ,/b2 L2 1."
* Unfortunately Galton has the value V O + b21 which is very liable to confuse the reader. t In more modern notation, this may be looked upon as the variability of the array of the
second relative = c2 (1 -?-'I); therefore r = ./c2/(c2 +b 2). Hence the regression of first relative on second relative = rc/ Jc2 + b2 x a = ~ + b2 x a. Again the variance of the difference in character
between the two relatives = c2 + (c2 + b2) - 2c1/c2 + b2 r = b2, or b has for physical meaning the probable error of the distribution of the difference in character between the two relatives.

|Page (1) of 1 - 03/02/13||email article||print page|
The Power is in the Pixels: Power Generation Game Added to Thinking Skills Club(March 02, 2013)
Toronto, ON (PRWEB) March 02, 2013
A steam kettle whistles. The steam activates an electric current causing a beaker of water to heat up and drip onto a turbine, which activates a new current and completes the circuit. Not the usual way to get energy from Point A to Point B, but a creative and compelling way to get to the next level in an online game called Electric Box.
The game, hosted by Candystand.com, was recently added to the Thinking Skills Club, an after school club where in grades 3 through 8 play computer games that help kids develop a variety of cognitive skills. Thinking Skills Club founder Mitch Moldofsky says the game was chosen because it employs logic, the concept of cause and effect, planning and making mistakes in order to win. "Making mistakes is very important in learning," says Moldofsky, an educator and Cognitive Science graduate from the University of Toronto, "I do it all the time."
Moldofsky believes the game encourages the development of executive function skills in the frontal lobes of the brain, based on another executive function training method, Tools of the Mind. "What they've found with Tools of the Mind is that simply modifying activities during the school day to include things like self-reflection, evaluation, planning and trial and error can radically shape a student's approach to activities outside the classroom as well, such as behavior," says Moldofsky. "Games like these encompass all of these skills."
Unlike other brain training games on the web, which Moldofsky claims are often repetitive and boring, the games on the Thinking Skills Club are "fun-tested," since they are culled from gaming sites. "These games are already being played by the kids in this age group, without the coercion of parents or teachers. They're intrinsically rewarding," he says.
There are five other types of games on the Thinking Skills Club aside from executive function, including attention and memory, even social skills. "There's some good new research out there about the effects of prosocial games," says Moldofsky, "and they're not too hard to find if you know where to look."
Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2013/3/prweb10486757.htm.
Related Keywords:education, adult education, further education, religious education, computing and information technology, satellite technology, wireless technology, science and technology, technology (general), identification technology, agricultural research and technology, plastic art, internet, entertainment award, entertainment (general), arts (general), arts, culture and entertainment, arts, culture and entertainment, entertainment (general), entertainment award, computer crime, Commonwealth Games, Winter Goodwill Games, Summer Asian Games, Winter Asian Games, Panamerican Games, African Games, Mediterranean Games, SouthEast Asiatic Games, PanPacific Games, SouthPacific Games, PanArabic Games, Summer Goodwill Games, World games, paralympic games, government aid, government debt, government contract, education, adult education, further education, religious education, government health care, government, national government, government departments, non government organizations (NGO), family, family planning, market research, research and development, medical research, science and technology, applied science, material science, human science, natural science, philosophical science, research, science (general), animal science, micro science, , weather science, agricultural research and technology

It’s a fact. Men are better than women … at sweating. Yep, we do it more frequently and more effectively. Congrats guys.
Researchers at Osaka International University in Japan measured the perspiration rates of men and women while they biked for an hour under controlled conditions.
The researchers had 37 subjects cycle for an hour at increasing intensities—active subjects had participated in endurance sports for more than six years, while inactive subjects had, for the most part, not performed regular physical activity in the previous three years. The scientists measured the subjects’ temperature, sweat rate and activated sweat glands for a number of sites on the body, including the forehead and thigh. The information was used to calculate sweat gland output and measure performance.
The study revealed that physically fit men sweat more than anyone else. In general, men sweat more than women, and that has its advantages. Sweating is how our body cools off. So, by sweating more than women, men are able to exercise for a longer time.
‘”It appears that women are at a disadvantage when they need to sweat a lot during exercise,” said Yoshimitsu Inoue, the study’s coordinator. “Especially in hot conditions.”
Previous physical training increased sweating in both men and women, but the increase was greater with men. As the workouts got more intense, the difference in sweating between the sexes increased. Interestingly enough, fit women sweat more than unfit men, but by an insignificant margin.
The researchers believe that testosterone could explain why men sweat better than women.
Prior research has shown a link between the male sex-hormone testosterone, physical training and an increase in sweat rate. Although they did not measure the hormone among their subjects, the researchers suggest the hormone may play a role in their results.
So guys, the next time you enter into a women’s marathon, just make sure it’s really hot out. You’ll sweat more, and you’ll be a lock to win.

A.J. NesteBatteries at a station on a Philadelphia commuter line capture excess current when trains brake and store the power for use when a train accelerates.
A giant battery bank installed by the side of the Southeast Pennsylvania Transit Authority’s subway tracks a little over a month ago is saving about nine megawatt-hours of power a week, its manufacturer says, which is more electricity than the typical apartment-dweller uses in a year.
The battery system, which I wrote about last year, is allowing the trains to run a bit like Prius hybrids. When they slow down at a station, their motors turn into generators, converting torque into current. Before the battery bank was installed, some of that current was returned to the third rail; but if the voltage got too high, it was shunted instead into a giant electric heater under the train, which simply dissipated the energy as heat.
Now the battery captures excess current, about 3.5 to 4 kilowatt-hours per train that stops, and puts it back on the line when a train is accelerating. Sometimes it does this for several trains at once.
The battery bank is also receiving signals every four seconds from the regional grid operator and either absorbing energy or giving it back to the grid to help balance supply and demand.
Until very recently, the solar industry was mainly concerned with getting a toehold in the production of electricity at a utility-level scale. Now a New Jersey company is looking for its niche in a different field — how to handle a system that is saturated with solar energy, sometimes enough to destabilize the electric grid.
The company, Petra Solar, has a highly visible product: it is under contract to supply 200,000 panels that Public Service Electric & Gas will attached to utility poles around New Jersey. Around 75,000 are already up.
About six feet wide and four feet high, the panels make 200 watts when in full sun, and newer models will make 225 watts, the company says. On a mild day, one could almost meet the needs of an entire house in the daytime; on a hot day, four or five would run a window air conditioner.
On the top side of the panel, the side angled toward the sun, is the obvious attention-getter, the polycrystalline solar cell. What is different is the electronics bolted to the bottom, which are meant to prevent a solar power overdose. They could turn out to be crucial, according to company executives.

Vedic Art: Indian Miniature Painting, Part 14
BY: SUN STAFF
Ahmadnagar, c. 1595
Dec 26, 2011 CANADA (SUN) A serial presentation of India's artistic legacy in paintings, sculpture and temple architecture.
THE DECCANI SCHOOLS
16th to 18th Centuries
Like the group of Bikaner paintings featured in yesterday's segment, of Govinda fluting with His cows, there are many beautiful Vaisnava themes to be found among the Deccan Miniatures. Today we take a brief look at paintings from the Ahmednagar School, a sub-category of the Deccan School. In the Ahmednagar Miniatures, Vaisnava themes are overshadowed by the Persian influence, no doubt because the earliest examples of this school are no longer in existence.
Ahmednagar, Maharashtra, situated about 250 km. due east of Mumbai, was an Islamic kingdom during the Sixteenth Century. During the late Iron Age it was part of the territory of the Sattavahanas and during the 1st Millennium A.D. it was ruled by the Yadavas, until it fell to the Muslim intruders.
Ragamala, Ahmednagar, 17th c.
Nearly all the early examples of Ahmednagar painting are in the Persian style, an influence seen not only in themes, but also in the richly brilliant colors, high horizons, golden skies and landscapes, and gilt scripts framing the wide borders of manuscript illustrations. This style is equally evident in Ahmednagar School Ragamala illustrations of the period.
In the Ragamala illustration of Vasanta Raga above, the painting is bordered along with top with the Raga verse in Devanagari script vas (anta). Not shown is an additional caption above that, in Arabic characters, which mislabels the painting as Hindola Raga and Vasant Ragini. The raga depicted is actually the Vasanta, and it was no doubt the introduction of the swing (hindola) that led to the confusion of titles.
The Sanskrit verses for this Raga describe how Vasanta (the male personification of Spring, or Kamadeva) is sprayed with holi colors by young maids in a mango grove, on a Kashmiri mountain. Praised by strings of bees, he disports himself on a swing. Like a blue lotus (dark complexioned) and dressed in a tawny garment, he holds in his fingers the shoots of the fresh mango.
In the painting, the young male Spring wears a four-pointed coat, a fashionable style worn during the reign of Akbar. This aspect of the figure may have been adopted by the artist from a Malwa influence. The distinctive feature of the women's costumes are the projecting transparent veils, a style also found in the Nimat Namah (cookbook) of Malwa. This may tie it to the Chaurapanchasika Group of Miniatures, perhaps developed in its classical form in Malwa or south Rajasthan during the second half of the 16th Century. This detail of costume does point to the northern Deccan origin of this Vasanta Raga illustration.
Ministry of Culture, Government of India
Submit an Article
Copyright 2005, 2011, HareKrsna.com. All rights reserved.

- Current Issue
SIGN IN to access the Harper’s archive
ALERT: Usernames and passwords from the old Harpers.org will no longer work. To create a new password and add or verify your email address, please sign in to customer care and select Email/Password Information. (To learn about the change, please read our FAQ.)
From “What Democracy? The case for abolishing the United States Senate,” by Richard N. Rosenfeld in the May 2004 Harper’s.
Americans believe in the idea of democracy. We fight wars in its name and daily pledge allegiance to its principles. Curiously, the fervor with which we profess our faith in democracy is matched only by the contempt with which we regard our politics and politicians. How interesting that we should so dislike the process that we claim to revere. Perhaps, however, our unhappiness with politics points to something significant; perhaps Americans dislike the daily reality of their political system precisely because it falls short of being a proper democracy. Indeed, in the last presidential election, we saw a man take office who did not win the popular vote. Money above all else shapes our political debate and determines its outcome, and in the realm of public policy, even when an overwhelming democratic majority expresses its preference (as for national health insurance), deadlocks, vetoes, filibusters, and “special interests” stand in the way. No wonder so few people vote in national elections; we have become a nation of spectators, not citizens.
The United States of America is not, strictly speaking, a democracy; indeed, the U.S. Constitution was deliberately designed to prevent the unfettered expression of the people’s will. Yet the Founders were not, as some imagine, of one mind concerning the proper shape of the new American union, and their disputes are instructive. The political dysfunction that some imagine to be a product of recent cultural decadence has been with us from the beginning. In fact, the document that was meant to prevent democracy in America has bequeathed the American people a politics of minority rule in which our leaders must necessarily pursue their unpopular aims by means of increasingly desperate stratagems of deceit and persuasion.
Yet hope remains, for if Americans have little real experience of democracy, they remain a nation convinced that the best form of government is by and for the people. Growing numbers of Americans suspect that all is not right with the American Way. Citizens, faced with the prospect of sacrificing the well-being of their children and grandchildren on the altar of supply-side economics, the prospect of giving up new schools and hospitals so that the colony in Iraq might have zip codes and modern garbage trucks, have begun to ask hard questions. Politics, properly understood as the deliberate exercise of citizenship by a free people, appears to be enjoying a renaissance, but the hard point must be made nonetheless that tinkering with campaign-finance reform is unlikely to be sufficient to the task. True reform becomes possible only if Americans are willing to return to the root of our political experiment and try again. And if democracy is our aim, the first object of our constitutional revision must be the United States Senate.
“We now have probably the most powerful upper house of any legislature,” Ritchie said. “Combine that with the inequality, and it creates some peculiar situations.” Not all small states are G.O.P. strongholds. (Hello, Vermont, Delaware and Rhode Island.) And it’s true that Obama won the 2008 nomination thanks in part to racking up caucus victories in states such as Idaho and Wyoming. But since Obama took office, senators from the wide-open spaces have asserted themselves against him over and over. Conrad opposed his plan to cut subsidies for wealthy farmers. Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa) pushed to focus transportation funding in the stimulus bill on rural areas and last week blocked the lifting of sugar tariffs to protect the ethanol industry. –“The Gangs of D.C.: In the Senate, small states wield outsize power. Is this what the Founders had in mind?” by Alec Macgillis, The Washington Post
Ezra Klein with Harper’s editor Luke Mitchell on the Leonard Lopate show today;
insurance and citizenship;
the leading cause of catastrophic injury in young women: cheerleading;
a review of Why This World: A Biography of Clarice Lispector by “New Books” author Benjamin Moser
According to plant pathologists, this killer round of blight began with a widespread infiltration of the disease in tomato starter plants. Large retailers like Home Depot, Kmart, Lowe’s and Wal-Mart bought starter plants from industrial breeding operations in the South and distributed them throughout the Northeast. (Fungal spores, which can travel up to 40 miles, may also have been dispersed in transit.) Once those infected starter plants arrived at the stores, they were purchased and planted, transferring their pathogens like tiny Trojan horses into backyard and community gardens. Perhaps this is why the Northeast was hit so viciously: instead of being spread through large farms, the blight sneaked through lots of little gardens, enabling it to escape the attention of the people who track plant diseases. It’s important to note, too, that this year there have been many more hosts than in the past as more and more Americans have taken to gardening… the explosion of home gardeners— the very people most conscious of buying local food and opting out of the conventional food chain— has paradoxically set the stage for the worst local tomato harvest in memory. –“You Say Tomato, I Say Agricultural Disaster,” Dan Barber, The New York Times
Suggestions for flavours range from Gooey Decimal System to Sh-sh-sh-sherbet. Woodworth writes on Facebook that the logic behind the scheme is that “libraries are awesome, Ben & Jerry’s ice-cream is tasty, therefore a library-themed Ben & Jerry’s ice-cream would be tasty awesome.” Gooey Decimal System could combine dark fudge alphabet letters with caramel swirls in hazelnut ice-cream, he suggests, while Dusty Stacks could be a layered ice-cream with speckles of cocoa in every layer. Li-Berry pie could mix lime sherbet with raspberry sauce and pie-crust pieces, and Overdue Fine as Fudge Chunk could drop fudge brownies and white chocolate coins into milk chocolate ice-cream swirled with caramel. The fine details of Sh-sh-sh-sherbet aren’t pinned down quite yet– it could be key lime, or possibly a vanilla/chocolate combination –“Book Fans Develop a Taste for Library-themed Ice-cream,” Alison Flood, The Guardian
Lucas Mann on hope and change in a minor-league-baseball city
Minimum number of baboons forced to smoke crack in a 1989 study testing the efficacy of cigarettes as a drug delivery device:
A reduction in distrust toward atheists was documented among pious Canadians who are reminded of the Vancouver police.
A Missouri cinema apologized for hiring an actor dressed in body armor and carrying a fake rifle to appear at a screening of Iron Man 3.
Subscribe to the Weekly Review newsletter. Don’t worry, we won’t sell your email address!
“This is the heart of the magic factory, the place where medicine is infused with the miracles of science, and I’ve come to see how it’s done.”

The parathyroid glands are four pea-sized glands. They are located next to the thyroid gland in the neck. The glands secrete the parathyroid hormone (PTH). PTH helps to regulate the level of calcium in the blood.
In hypoparathyroidism there is not enough PTH secreted. This causes very low levels of calcium in the blood. Low blood calcium is known as hypocalcemia.
Several factors are known to cause hypoparathyroidism, including:
The following factors increase your chance of developing hypoparathyroidism:
Many patients with hypoparathyroidism will have not symptoms. If symptoms do develop, they may include:
Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and medical history. A physical exam will be done. You may be referred to specialist. Endocrinologists focus on hormone disorders.
Your doctor may need to test your bodily fluids. This can be done with:
Your doctor may need pictures of your body structures. This can be done with:
Talk with your doctor about the best plan for you. Treatment options include the following:
Calcium and vitamin D will usually be taken indefinitely. They are often taken by mouth.
Calcium may be given by injection. This is done when immediate symptom relief is needed.
National Organization for Rare Disorders, Inc.
Thyroid Foundation of Canada
Definition of hypoparathyroidism and related disorders. The Hypoparathyroidism Association website. Available at: https://www.hypopara.org/about-hpth/definition.html . Accessed January 2, 2013.
Hypoparathyroidism. EBSCO DynaMed website. Available at: http://www.ebscohost.com/dynamed . Updated March 7, 2012. Accessed January 2, 2013.
Hypoparathyroidism. National Organization for Rare Disorders website. Available at: http://www.raredis... . Accessed January 2, 2013.
Marx SJ. Hyperparathyroid and hypoparathyroid disorders. N Engl J Med . 2000;343:1863.
Moffett JM, Suliburk J. Parathyroid autotransplantation. Endocr Pract . 2011 Mar-Apr;17 Suppl 1:83-89.
Testini M, Gurrado A, Lissidini G, Nacchiero M. Hypoparathyroidism after total thyroidectomy. Minerva Chir . 2007 Oct;62(5):409-415.
Thakker RV. Genetic developments in hypoparathyroidism. Lancet . 2001;357:974.
Winer KK, Ko CW, et al. Long-term treatment of hypoparathyroidism: a randomized controlled study comparing parathyroid hormone (1-34) versus calcitriol and calcium. J Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2003;88:4214-4220.
Last reviewed March 2013 by Brian Randall, MD
Last Updated: 03/15/2013

An osteochondroma is the most common type of benign bone tumor. It arises from cartilage tissue in children and adolescents between the ages of 10 and 20, usually appearing on the long bones (arms and legs) and less often on the pelvic bones and wing bones (scapulae). An osteochondroma ordinarily stops growing when a person reaches full height.
Most tissue in the body can grow beyond normal limits and form a mass, also known as a tumor. Tumors come in two forms: benign and malignant. The malignancies which are referred to as cancer, rarely stop growing. The benign tumors reach a certain size and then stop.
Bones can host at least ten different benign tumors, some of which turn into cancers. Less than 1% of osteochondromas turn into a bone cancer called chondrosarcoma, usually in later years.
The cause of osteochondroma remains unknown. A hereditary form of the disease is presumably related to one or more gene mutations (see below).
The following factors increase your chance of developing osteochondroma. If you have any of these risk factors, tell your doctor:
If you experience any of these symptoms do not assume it is due to osteochondroma. These symptoms may be caused by other, more serious health conditions. If you experience any one of them, see your physician.
Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and medical history, and perform a physical exam. You will very likely be referred to an orthopedic surgeon for further diagnosis and treatment.
Tests may include the following:
Treatment options include the following:
If the lump is not uncomfortable or likely to cause a fracture or other problem, and there is no evidence that it is malignant, it can be left alone. Your doctor may want to retest periodically.
If the lump is large, uncomfortable, in a dangerous location, or suspected of being cancerous, surgical removal is the treatment of choice. This involves a general or regional anesthetic and a few days in the hospital. If the bone is weakened by the surgery, the surgeon may need to rebuild it, and the recovery time may be extended to weeks or months.
Since remnants of the tumor may remain after surgery, your doctor may want to retest you every few years to make sure it doesn’t start to grow again.
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
Canadian Orthopaedic Association
Childhood Cancer Foundation
Patel SR, Benjamin RS. Soft tissue and bone sarcomas and bone metastases. In: Kasper DL, et al, eds. Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine . 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2005.
Spencer S. Eccles Health Sciences Library, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, University of Utah website. Available at: http://www-medlib.med.utah.edu/WebPath/BONEHTML/BONE050.html . Accessed July 2005.
Last reviewed September 2012 by Igor Puzanov, MD
Last Updated: 09/26/2012

- Born ca. 1721
- Revolutionary leader
- Cousin of Thomas Jefferson
- Attorney General of Virginia Colony
- Chaired first and second Continental Congress
- Died 1775
First to be called “Father of country”
Peyton Randolph was on the black list of patriots the British proposed to arrest and hang after he presided over the Continental Congress in 1775. Upon his return to Williamsburg, the volunteer company of militia of the city offered him its protection in an address that concluded:
"May heaven grant you long to live the father of your country –
and the friend to freedom and humanity!"
If his friend George Washington succeeded him as America’s patriarch, Randolph nevertheless did as much as any Virginian to bring the new nation into the world. He presided over every important Virginia assembly in the years leading to the Revolution, was among the first of the colony's great men to oppose the Stamp Act, chaired the first meeting of the delegates of 13 colonies at Philadelphia in 1774, and chaired the second in 1775.
Randolph was born 54 years before the Second Continental Congress – probably in Williamsburg in 1721 – the second son of Sir John and Lady Susannah Randolph. His first name was his maternal grandmother's maiden name, just as his older brother Beverley's was their mother's. The surname Randolph identified him as a scion of 18th-century Virginia's most powerful clan.
When Peyton Randolph was three or four years old, the family moved into the imposing wooden home on Market Square now known as the Peyton Randolph House. His father, among Virginia's most distinguished attorneys, Speaker of the House of Burgesses, and a wealthy man, died when Peyton was 16, leaving the house and other property for him in trust with his mother. The will also gave Peyton his father's extensive library in the hope he would "betake himself to the study of law." By then, he had a brother John and a sister Mary.
Study of law
Attentive to his father's wishes, Peyton Randolph attended the College of William & Mary, then learned the law in London's Inns of Court. He entered the Middle Temple on October 13, 1739, and took a place at the bar February 10, 1743. Returning to Williamsburg, he was appointed the colony's attorney general by Governor William Gooch on May 7, 1744. His father had filled the office before him, and his brother would assume the role after.
At the age of 24, Randolph was eligible for his inheritance. On March 8, 1746, he married Betty Harrison, and on July 21 (more than two years after his return from London), he qualified himself for the private practice of law in York County.
His cousin Thomas Jefferson may have shed some light on the delay in a character sketch he wrote of Randolph years later. "He was indeed a most excellent man," Jefferson said, but "heavy and inert in body, he was rather too indolent and careless for business."
He was, as well, occupied with myriad public duties. In 1747, he became a vestryman of Bruton Parish Church, and in 1748, he became Williamsburg's representative in the House of Burgesses, and in 1749, a justice of the peace.
Randolph returned to the house in 1752 as the burgess for the college of William & Mary and on December 15, 1753, the house hired him as its special agent for some “ticklish business” in London.
Soon after he arrived in Virginia in 1751, Governor Robert Dinwiddie had begun to exercise a right no governor before him had tried: the imposition of a fee for certifying land patents. For his signature, Dinwiddie demanded a pistole, a Spanish coin worth about 20 shillings. Regarding the fee as an unauthorized tax, Virginians objected, though to no avail.
Peyton Randolph was dispatched to England as the house's agent, with directions to go over the governor's head. But as attorney general, it was his duty to represent the interests of the Crown, of which Dinwiddie was the principal representative in Virginia. Randolph was attacking the right of the governor he was appointed to defend!
The governor refused to give Peyton Randolph permission to leave the colony, but he left anyway. In London, he had to answer for his action, and he was ousted from the attorney general's office. Dinwiddie had already named George Wythe as acting attorney general in Randolph's place.
Nevertheless, the London officials pointedly suggested that Dinwiddie reconsider his fee and said that they would have no objection to Peyton Randolph's reinstatement if he apologized. So he did, and subsequently resumed office soon after his return to Williamsburg.
French and Indian War
Reelected burgess for the College of William & Mary in 1755, he involved himself the next year in a somewhat ludicrous, though harmless, attempt to promote morale during the French and Indian War. With other prominent men, he formed the Associators, a group to raise and pay bounties for private troops to join the regular force at Winchester. George Washington, in charge of the fort there, wasn't sure what he would do with the untrained men if they arrived. Not enough came, however, to cause any inconvenience.
In 1757, Randolph joined the college's board, and he served as a rector for one year. He was reelected burgess for Williamsburg in 1761, and thus entered the phase of his life that thrust him into a leadership role in the Revolution.
Word of Parliament's intended Stamp Act brought Virginians and their burgesses into conflict with the Crown itself in 1764. Peyton Randolph was appointed chairman of a committee to draft protests to the king, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons maintaining the colony's exclusive right of self-taxation.
Disagreement with Patrick Henry
This responsibility put Peyton Randolph at odds with Patrick Henry, the Virginian most noted for opposition to the tax. At the end of the legislative session in 1765, Henry, a freshman, introduced seven resolutions against the act. Peyton Randolph, George Wythe, and others thought that Henry's resolutions added nothing to the colony's case and that their consideration was improper until the colony had a reply to its earlier protests.
In the final days of the session, after many opponents had left the city, Patrick Henry introduced his measures and made the famous speech in which he said “Caesar had his Brutus, Charles the First had his Cromwell, and George the Third . . .” prompting cries of treason from the remaining burgesses present. Peyton Randolph, though not yet Speaker, was presiding. When Speaker John Robinson resumed the chair the following day (May 30), Henry carried five of his resolves by a single ballot. A tie would have allowed Robinson to cast the deciding "nay." Jefferson, standing at the chamber door, said Peyton Randolph emerged saying, "By God, I would have given one hundred guineas for a single vote."
Patrick Henry left town, and the next day his fifth (and most radical) resolution was expunged by the burgesses who remained. Nevertheless, it was reprinted with the others in newspapers across the colonies as if it stood.
Speaker of the House of Burgesses
Peyton Randolph was elected Speaker on November 6, 1766, succeeding the deceased Robinson and defeating Richard Henry Lee. Peyton's brother John succeeded him as attorney general the following June. By now the brothers had begun to disagree politically; John's conservatism would take him to England in 1775 while Peyton joined the rebellion.
Leads rebel meeting at Raleigh Tavern
Another set of Patrick Henry's resolves, against the Townshend Duties, came before the House in May 1769. This time Peyton Randolph approved their passage, but Governor Botetourt did not. He dissolved the assembly. The "former representatives of the people," as they called themselves, met the next day at the Raleigh Tavern with Speaker Peyton Randolph in the chair. They adopted a compact drafted by George Mason and introduced by George Washington against the importation of British goods. Speaker Randolph was the first to sign.
When the new legislature met in the winter, the governor was pleased to announce the repeal of all of the Townshend Duties, except the small one on tea. Legislative attention turned to other, calmer affairs. The next summer Peyton Randolph became chairman of the building committee for the Public Hospital.
Closing of Boston Harbor troubles Virginia burgesses
Tempers flared again in 1773, when Great Britain proposed to transport a band of Rhode Island smugglers to England for trial. The implications for Virginia were troublesome, and the burgesses appointed a standing Committee of Correspondence and Inquiry with Speaker Peyton Randolph as chairman. The following May brought word of the closing of the port of Boston in retaliation for its Tea Party.
On May 24, 1774, Robert Carter Nicholas introduced a resolution drafted by Thomas Jefferson that read:
"This House, being deeply impressed with apprehension of the great dangers, to be derived to British America, from the hostile Invasion of the City of Boston, in our Sister Colony of Massachusetts bay, whose commerce and harbour are, on the first Day of June next, to be stopped by an Armed force, deem it highly necessary that the said first day of June be set apart, by the Members of this House, as a day of Fasting, Humiliation and Prayer, devoutly to implore the divine interposition for averting the heavy Calamity which threatens destruction to our Civil Rights, and the Evils of civil War; to give us one heart and one Mind to firmly oppose, by all just and proper means, every injury to American Rights; and that the Minds of his Majesty and his parliament, may be inspired from above with Wisdom, Moderation, and Justice, to remove from the loyal People of America, all cause of danger, from a continued pursuit of Measure, pregnant with their ruin."
The resolution was adopted.
House of Burgesses dissolved
Governor Dunmore summoned the house on May 26, 1774 and told Peyton Randolph: "Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the House of Burgesses, I have in my hand a paper published by order of your House, conceived in such terms as reflect highly upon His Majesty and the Parliament of Great Britain, which makes it necessary for me to dissolve you; and you are accordingly dissolved."
Continental Congress proposed
On May 27, 1774, a group of 89 burgesses gathered again at the Raleigh Tavern to form another “non-importation association,” and the following day the Committee of Correspondence proposed a Continental Congress. Twenty-five burgesses met at Peyton Randolph's house on May 30 and scheduled a state convention to be held on August 1 to consider a proposal from Boston for a ban on exports to England.
Peyton Randolph led the community to Bruton Parish Church on June 1 to pray for Boston, and soon he was organizing a Williamsburg drive to send provisions and cash for its relief. The First Virginia Convention approved the export ban and elected as delegates to the Congress Peyton Randolph, Richard Henry Lee, George Washington, Patrick Henry, Richard Bland, Benjamin Harrison, and Edmund Pendleton.
Signs will before departure for the First Continental Congress
Before he left Williamsburg on August 18, 1774, Peyton Randolph wrote his will, leaving his property to the use of his wife for life. They had no children. The property was to be auctioned after her death and the proceeds divided among Randolph's heirs.
Unanimously elected chairman of Continental Congress
When Congress convened in Philadelphia on September 5, Thomas Lynch of South Carolina nominated Peyton Randolph to be chairman. He was elected by unanimous vote. Delegate Silas Deane wrote his wife, "Designed by nature for the business, of an affable, open and majestic deportment, large in size, though not out of proportion, he commands respect and esteem by his very aspect, independent of the high character he sustains."
500 merchants sign trade ban against England
In October 1774, Peyton Randolph returned to Williamsburg to preside at an impending meeting of the house. Repeatedly postponed, it did not meet until the following June. Nonetheless, on November 9 Peyton Randolph accepted a copy of the Continental Association banning trade with England signed by nearly 500 merchants gathered in Williamsburg.
Disperses angry crowd gathered at courthouse in Williamsburg
Peyton Randolph was in the chair again at the Second Virginia Convention in Richmond on March 23 when Patrick Henry rose and made his "Liberty or Death" speech in favor of the formation of a statewide militia. In reaction, Governor Dunmore removed the gunpowder from Williamsburg's Magazine on April 21. Alerted to the theft, a mob gathered at the courthouse. Peyton Randolph was one of the leaders who persuaded the crowd to disperse and averted violence.
British put Randolph on rebel execution list
Peyton Randolph led the Virginia delegation to the Second Continental Congress in May 1775, and he again took the chair. General Thomas Gage, commander of British forces in America, had been issued blank warrants for the execution of rebel leaders and a list of names with which to fill them. Peyton Randolph's name was on the list. He returned to Williamsburg under guard, and the town bells pealed to announce his safe arrival. The militia escorted him to his house and pledged to guarantee his safety.
The Third Virginia Convention reelected its speaker to Congress in July 1775, and Randolph left for Philadelphia in late August or early September. By this time, John Hancock had succeeded him to its chair.
Died before Independence
About 8 p.m. on Sunday, October 23, Peyton Randolph began to choke, a side of his face contorted, and he died of an "apoplectic stroke." He was buried that Tuesday at Christ's Church in Philadelphia. His nephew, Edmund Randolph, brought his remains to Williamsburg in 1776, and he was interred in the family crypt in the Chapel at the College of William and Mary on November 26.
Peyton Randolph's estate was auctioned on February 19, 1783, following the death of his widow Betty Randolph. Thomas Jefferson bought his books. Among them were bound records dating to Virginia's earliest days that still are consulted by historians. Added to the collection at Monticello that Jefferson sold to the federal government years later, they became part of the core of the Library of Congress.
For further reading:

What does the term "Flawed Democracy" actually mean?
Why are some of the world's successful democracies like France, Israel and India rated "Flawed Democracies" by the Economist Intelligence Unit?
First off the wikipedia page that you cite to is based on the Economist Intelligence Unit's Democracy Index ("EIUDI") which is not an academic source. The methodology used to assemble the report is not known, but that doesn't mean that it is not useful.
With that in mind from the EIUDI 2011 Report:
The EIUDI report uses five criteria to measure a country's democracy:
The countries that you are interested in scored as follows for these five categories:
France: France scores relatively low on "Functioning of government," "Political participation," and "Political culture."
Israel: Israel scores pretty bad on "Civil liberties," and sort of mediocre on everything else.
India: India scores bad on both "Political participation," and "Political culture."
So these countries have good governments, but there are certain issues typically related to the political culture that bring their overall score down and make them flawed democracies according to the index.
|show 2 more comments|
Democracy, in this index in particular, mostly refers to participation in the governments system of elections. Not electioneering, laws or even policies that could inherently discriminate. It is a weak index and is only useful for investors looking for a predictable government to trade with, or to entrench a western cultural world view. Its virtually guaranteed that foreign exchange controls and this index are highly correlated.
Besides the methodology of collecting information being scientifically unsound, this is not an indicator of human rights, discrimination in the public space, respect for international law or even outright racist laws and policies. These can all be violated "democratically". But then again, this is the Economist, which has proven repeatedly to present a highly neo-liberal bias in it's political commentary (white-male-westerners will likely disagree).
Not a good index, not representative of the reality of the world.
Civil rights: The most important thing in a democracy is human and civil rights, as well as the rule of the law (ie not arbitrary decisions). With the Indefinite Detention Act voted in the USA, plus Guantanamo, non respect for international laws, drones strikes, the enforced role of the military in the civilian sector, police brutality... and so much more, the USA is way down in the rank of democracies.
Political culture: This is set upside down, a ridiculous way of evaluation. France gives exposure to all presidential as well as house representatives candidates: equal time to speak on TV, equal exposure in all aspects during the weeks before the elections. And that's how you can promote knowledge and awareness, which is culture. It is not at all this way in America. On the contrary, the US people are stuck with their two political parties system that represents the rich and powerful elite only, those capable of paying to be heard and known by the public. "Culture" in the US is only available on given topics, the point of views of the rich and interests of big business only. This only promotes ignorance. Actually, the USA is not democracy, it's plutocracy. It does not deserve a high rank. It has one of the lowest and most backwards political culture and system in the Western world, belonging to the beginning of the 20th century, no longer to the 21rst.
Corruption should be a major criterion to include in the index. There, France ranks very low. So does the USA.
Freedom of press is an aspect, but the actual representation of a greater diversity of points of views from all sides should be the criterion to include in the index. That's the means and obstructions to freedom of expression. It is huge in the USA with over 85% of all news coming out of 5 corporations linked to the CIA, defense conglomerate and corporate interests in general.
And much more.

A reading for Cultural Anthropology
by Walter Trobisch
(adapted from Readings in Missionary Anthropology II, edited by William Smalley. Used under the educational "fair use" provision of the 1976 U.S. Copyright Acts.)
"Jesus took the man aside, away from the crowd ... and said to him 'Be opened.' With that his ears were opened, and at the same time the impediment was removed." (Mark 7:33-35)
What we need is a message tailored for each individual. In a concrete situation, general principles alone are not enough. Let us therefore take three people aside -- away from the crowd. Let us try to help them and take responsibility for them as a congregation. All three of them are real persons. They come from three different African countries, thousands of miles apart, but I shall not tell you from which countries and I have changed their names. They have given me permission to use their cases as an example, so I am not breaking their confidence.
Joseph is a 26-year-old teacher at a mission school. I never met him, but we corresponded for almost three years. He wrote me after he had read my book I Loved a Girl:Three years ago I married a 15 year-old person. I have ten years of schooling, my wife only six. God blessed us one year ago with a baby. I purposely did not choose a. girl with a higher level of education, for I intended to educate my wife in order that she become exactly as I wanted her to be in her work and cleanliness, in her whole life. But she does not satisfy me any more with her obedience. She does not do what I command her to do. If I insist, we quarrel. I ask you for a solution to save this young marriage.
In order to help Joseph we have to understand his way of thinking. For him, marriage is an alliance with an inferior being. For him, a woman is primarily a garden. Man is then primarily the bearer of the seed of life. Such is their mutual destiny. Their destiny decides their function. Their function defines their relationship. According to this conception the woman can never be as important as the man, any more than the soil can be as important as the seed. By her very nature, she is secondary, auxiliary. This is the root of all discrimination between man and woman that has shaped the history of mankind, not only in Africa, but also in Asia and -- until recently -- in Europe and America. This conception of marriage is not only based on a wrong and inaccurate biology. It is also not in accordance with the New Testament which conceives of husband and wife as equal partners before God.
My task was to change Joseph's image of marriage. Here is my answer:Joseph, you have not married a wife. You have married a daughter. You were looking for a maid, obedient to your commandments. She was 15 when you married her. Now she is 18. In these three years she has developed from a girl to a young woman. In addition she has become a mother. This has changed her personality completely. She wants to be treated as a person. She wants to become your partner . . . It strikes me that your quarreling started after God gave you a baby. How long is the period of lactation in your tribe? Could it be that your quarreling has a deeper reason? It is not God's will for a married couple to abstain from physical union for such a long time.Joseph's answer came quickly:You are exactly right . . . It is true that we abstain from sex relations for two years after the birth of a child ... This habit is incorporated in us. Otherwise we are afraid of losing the baby, especially if the mother breast-feeds it and if it is a boy .. . My father - in - law pointed this out to me when our child was born.
The practice of abstaining from sex relations during the period of lactation presupposes a polygamous society. According to the biological conception of marriage, a man can have several gardens to be planted one after the other. A garden can have one proprietor only, Joseph wants to be a Christian. He has been taught by his church that polygamy is sin. But he has been left with this negative message. He has not received any positive advice on how to live with one wife as a partner, nor has he been told how to space his children.
It is interesting that Joseph did not confide his problem to his pastor. Evidently he did not expect any help from the pastor. Still, Joseph looks for a counselor. He may find that counselor in a questionable friend, maybe one that is not even a Christian, and he may be advised to do things which are poison for his marriage. The method our couple uses for spacing their children -- complete abstention -- will lead to an estrangement and husband and wife will slowly drift apart.
Let us imagine that Joseph would have tried to solve his problem by taking a second wife. It is evident that refusing him communion as punishment for this action would have been the most inadequate answer to his problem on how to space his children. What is needed in Africa are not church disciplinarians, but marriage counselors.
In this case had Joseph not gone ahead and simply taken a second wife, but confided his intention to his pastor, explaining his motive, would his pastor have been able to help? Would the pastor have received enough training in this respect at the seminary? When a Christian takes a second wife, it is mostly due to the fact that his congregation has not carried responsibility for him.
It is unkind and merciless if missionaries condemn polygamy as sin, but keep silent to Africans about methods of conception control which they themselves use. It is even more so because a missionary usually has powdered milk at his disposal while an African villager does not.
Let us imagine another possibility. Maybe Joseph did not take a second wife, but secretly had sexual relations with an unknown girl, or even the wife of another man. In other words, he had committed adultery. Now, since he wants to be a Christian, his conscience hurts him. What could he have done? Would he have found someone in your congregation to whom he could have gone, confessed his sin and received the absolution? If he had come to you, whether you are a pastor or not, would you have known what to do?
What is needed in Africa are not ex-communicators but confessors who are keep the secret of confession absolute. What kind of training do our pastors receive in this respect? Here is the heart of the congregational responsibility for the individual. The offer of private confession is probably the most helpful contribution the Lutheran Church could make to the African churches as a whole. Martin Luther said: "No one knows what private confession can do for him, except he who has struggled much with the devil. Yes the devil would have slain me long ago, if the confession would not have sustained me."
It is also possible that Joseph would not have dared to confess, but maybe you would have heard anyway about his sin. Then it would have been your duty to go to him. Responsibility for the individual means to take the initiative. Just as God has taken the initiative in Jesus Christ and has spoken to us without our inviting Him, so we have to take the initiative and talk to our brother, even if he does not ask us. This is "church discipline" according to the New Testament. "Go ye therefore ..." not to put him out of the church but to win him back to Jesus Christ (Matthew 18:15; 2 Thessalonians 3:15; 2 Timothy 2:25). Church discipline means to go and to win, not to wait and to judge.
There is not time to report the case of Joseph in full. The relationship between him and his wife improved after I informed him about other methods of conception control. Later on a new problem arrived. The family moved from the village to town. While living in the village Joseph's wife had fed her family from that which she had grown in her own garden. But in town she did not have a garden. She had to go shopping. Joseph had to give her money, which had rarely happened before.
Here is Joseph's letter:Tell me how to make up a family budget and how to convince a woman -- however idiotic she may be -- to keep it. Most of the time my wife buys things which we don't need and then they spoil.I made up a detailed monthly budget according to Joseph's income and included as one item, "pocket money for each one of you." Joseph wrote:My wife was very happy about it. After we had divided up the money, she was frank enough to tell me also the criticisms which she had in her heart about my spending habits. She was overwhelmed by joy to see the item, "pocket money for each one of you."
This was, after almost three years of correspondence, the first time that Joseph had reported to me a reaction of his wife. The fact that he had shared my letter with her, that he even listened to her reproaches, but above all the fact that he gave her spending money, shows that his marriage had grown from a patriarchal pattern where the husband-father dominates his wife, into a marriage of partnership. A garden cannot rejoice and talk. One cannot listen to a garden. Joseph's wife had changed from a garden to a person. She had become a wife.
Formerly, the course of life was channeled. The individual made very few decisions on his own. The road was marked by customs and traditions. This had changed now. The individual has to make up his mind about many things which formerly were decided by the family and the group. But -- as the case of Joseph and his wife shows -- the individual is not trained to make these decisions. Counseling therefore becomes indispensable. It belongs to the responsibility of the congregation. It is the service which the Christian church must give in a situation of social change.
The work of the counselor can be compared best of all with "swimming." The time is past when a counselor could stand on a solid hilltop and give prefabricated rules and commandments to the counselee. The counselor has to descend from the hilltop and go into the water. Counselor and counselee have to swim together. With this picture of "swimming" in mind, the fact of uncertainty is expressed. At the outset the counselor may be more in need of advice than his counselee. But he swims together with him, trying to make. out beforehand the whirlpools and the rapids, the islands and the riverbanks. For a limited time, while exploring the situation for clarification and solutions, the counselor becomes the partner of his counselee. God is in this situation and the counselor has to find his will together with the counselee. Only what the latter is able and willing to accept and put into practice will help him.
The development of Joseph's marriage during the time of our correspondence proves that marriage guidance by letter can be fruitful. It may even be easier to confide the most intimate problems to a complete stranger. Because of the long distances and the lack of trained counselors, marriage guidance by mail has great promise in Africa, all the more because a personal letter there is highly treasured. It gives the receiver the experience of "being taken aside, away from the crowd," to have his impediment removed.
Marriage guidance is not only a counseling task. It is also a missionary opportunity. Since marriage is part of practical Christian living, the Christian marriage counselor has the possibility of proclaiming the Gospel to non-Christians along with the advice he gives. Marriage has become the problem of life today. People of all confessions, religions, classes and races are interested in it. Every heathen, Muslim or Communist will listen to those who have something useful to say about marriage. As Christians, I believe we do have something useful to say. But, do we say it? Or is the church in possession of a treasure of knowledge and wisdom and is keeping it locked up instead of handing it out?
Elsie is a high school student and the daughter of a "minister of religion" as she calls it. I know her too only by letter. She wrote to me and asked: "How can I meet a Christian boy?" I advised her to attend church. There she could meet boys.
Here is her answer:The old people in our churches don't want boys to meet girls, not even to talk to them in their presence. Always the Sunday service begins by speaking against boys and girls. This has turned away most of the boys and girls from attending church. The other day the pastor said: "If any boy has written to you a letter, return it to him and tell him never to write to you any letter."I answered, but for a long time did not hear from Elsie. Later I learned that her school principal had confiscated my letter. I was not on the list of men with whom she was allowed to correspond. So my letter went to her parents, who lived in a small village hundreds of miles away from her school. It took three months before the permission came and my letter was handed over to Elsie.
Finally she wrote again:I have met a boy who is not of my tribe. He is a keen Christian and a student in a secondary school. It appears to me as if he would make a good husband according to the direction in your book I Loved a Girl. I went home and talked to my parents about him. They said they would not allow me to marry from any other tribe apart from mine. They claim that men from my boyfriend's tribe are going about with other women, even if they are married. I have tried to tell them that not all men from that tribe are bad, but they insist on my marrying someone from my own tribe. Since we are told that we should honor our parents, I cannot do something which is against their will. To make it worse: I do not live at home. I know very few boys from my own tribe. Seeing that this boy is interested in me, should I disregard my parents' advice?
In my answer I advised Elsie to take her boyfriend home once and present him to her parents so that they could meet him as a person. If she is certain about God's will for her marriage, she should obey God more than men.
Elsie's answer:My parents have become impossible. They cannot approve the choice I have made. They say they have heard rumors that the man I have chosen was misbehaving at college. But ever since I met him, he has never showed me any nonsense. I have decided to remain single for the whole of my life, unless I can marry him.Marriage between two Christians must be based on mutual trust and confidence. Confidence demands free choice. Free choice demands opportunities where young people can meet in a healthy atmosphere without suspicion. It belongs to the responsibility of the congregation to provide such opportunities. Many marriage problems in Africa have their root in the fact that the couple never had time and opportunity to really meet and get acquainted before marriage.
Many African boys and girls have a list with names of a limited number of persons with whom they correspond. In a society where the meeting of the sexes is still difficult, also for outward reasons, we have to recognize that letter-writing as a means to establish contacts, can be a good one. Instead of intercepting mail, schools should rather teach criteria of how to evaluate a letter and give helpful instructions for answering.
Elsie's case reflects two areas of conflict. There is the conflict between the younger and older generation. Dealing with parents, uncles and grandparents is probably the thorniest problem of a marriage counselor in Africa. It has been overlooked that, in a fast-changing society, the education of the older generation is also a responsibility of the congregation. The church may have to speak out on the rules of exogamy (the tradition forcing a young man to find a bride outside a defined group of relatives) or endogamy (reversely, the rule that a bride can only be found within a close core of relatives.) Once a young African wrote me that he had 11,000 girls ("sisters") in his tribe which he could not marry. Unfortunately, he had fallen in love with one of them.
There is also the conflict between individual freedom and the obligation to tradition and family. Elsie has new possibilities of choice, unknown to her parents. She is caught between (1) making use of this freedom and (2) submission to rules originating from customs no longer relevant to her situation. Like Joseph, she is in need of personal counseling in her new freedom.
Her decision to renounce this freedom and the wish of her heart, even against the advice of her counselors, poses lots of questions:
- If you had been her counselor, what would you have advised her to do?
- Assuming that God called Elsie to stay single, would it be possible for her to put this' decision into practice?
- Does our church have a message for single girls?
- What would be the responsibility of her congregation for her?
- Is the decision against individual freedom and for submission to tradition always God's will?
- Where are the limitations of the fourth commandment?
- What is behind the attitude of her parents? (Her father is a pastor !)
- How far here is also the "biological" conception of marriage at work?
- Will they be pleased by her "obedience" or rather be shocked that their "garden" shall never be planted?
- What could be done to help her parents to better understand their daughter?
Elsie's case is an encouraging one. She has character. She proves that one of the oncoming generation of African girls is able to make up her mind by herself instead of being pushed around and dominated. She is on her way to mature womanhood. Africa's future will depend upon this growth. There will be no free nations, unless there are free couples. There will be no free couples unless the wife grows into true partnership with her husband. It is the responsibility of the congregation to help toward such growth. It is the solution for Joseph's case as much as for Elsie's and even for our next case.
On one trip, I worshipped in an African church where nobody knew me. After the service I talked to two boys.
"How many brothers and sisters do you have?" I asked the first one.
"Are they all from the same stomach?"
"Yes, my father is a Christian."
"How about you?" I addressed the other boy.
He hesitated. In his mind he was adding up. I know immediately that he came from a polygamous family.
"We are nine," he finally said.
"Is your father a Christian?"
No," was the typical answer, "he is a polygamist."
"Are you baptized?"
"Yes, and my brothers and sister too," he added proudly.
"And their mothers?"
"They are all three baptized, but only the first wife takes communion."
"Take me to your father."
The boy led me to a compound with many individual houses. It breathed cleanliness, order and wealth. Each wife had her own house and her own kitchen. The father -- a middle-aged, good-looking man, tall, fat and impressive -- received me without embarrassment and with apparent joy. Omodo, as we shall call him, was well-educated, wide awake and intelligent, with a sharp wit and a rare sense of humor. From the outset, he made no apologies for being a polygamist. He was proud of it. Here's the essential content of our conversation which lasted for several hours.
"Welcome to the hut of a poor sinner!" The words were accompanied by good-hearted laughter.
"It looks like a rich sinner," I retorted.
"The saints come very seldom to this place," he said, "they don't want to be contaminated with sin."
"But they are not afraid to receive your wives and children. I just met them in church."
"I know. I give everyone a coin for the collection plate. I guess I finance half of the church's budget. They are glad to take my money, but they don't want me."
I sat in thoughtful silence.
After a while he continued, " I feel sorry for the pastor. By refusing to accept the polygamous men in town as church members, he has made his flock poor. They shall always be dependent upon subsidies from America. He has created a church of women whom he tells every Sunday that polygamy is wrong."
"Wasn't your first wife heart-broken when you took a second one?"
Omodo looked at me almost with pity. "It was her happiest day," he said finally.
"Tell me how it happened."
"Well, one day after she had come home from the garden and had fetched wood and water, she was preparing the evening meal, while I sat in front of my house and watched her. Suddenly she turned to me and mocked me. She called me a `poor man,' because I had only one wife. She pointed to our neighbor's wife who could care for her children while the other wife prepared the food."
"Poor man," Omodo repeated. "I can take much, but not that. I had to admit that she was right. She needed help. She had already picked out a second wife for me and they get along fine."
I glanced around the courtyard and saw a beautiful young woman, about 19 or 20, come out of one of the huts.
"It was a sacrifice for me," Omodo commented. "Her father demanded a very high bride price."
"Do you mean that the wife, who caused you to become a polygamist is the only one of your family who receives communion?"
"Yes, she told the missionary how hard it was for her to share her love for me with another woman. According to the church, my wives are considered sinless because each of them has only one husband. I, the father, am the only sinner in our family. Since the Lord's supper is not given to sinners, I am excluded from it. Do you understand that, pastor?"
I was entirely confused.
"And you see," Omodo continued, "they are all praying for me that I might be saved from sin, but they don't agree from which sin I must be saved."
"What do you mean?"
"Well, the pastor prays that I may not continue to commit the sin of polygamy. My wives pray that I may not commit the sin of divorce. I wonder whose prayers are heard first."
"So your wives are afraid that you become a Christian?"
"They are afraid that I become a church member. Let's put it that way. For me there is a difference. You see, they can only have intimate relations with me as long as I do not belong to the church. In the moment I would become a church member, their marriage relations with me would become sinful."
"Wouldn't you like to become a church member?"
"Pastor, don't lead me into temptation ! How can I become a church member if it means disobeying Christ? Christ forbade divorce, but not polygamy. The church forbids polygamy but demands divorce. How can I become a church member if I want to be a Christian? For me there is only one way: be a Christian without the church."
"Have you ever talked to your pastor about that?"
"He does not dare to talk to me, because he knows as well as I do that some of his elders have a second wife secretly. The only difference between them and me is that I am honest and they are hypocrites."
"Did a missionary ever talk to you?"
"Yes, once. I told him that with the high divorce rate in Europe, they have only a successive form of polygamy while we have a simultaneous polygamy. That did it. He never came back."
I was speechless. Omodo accompanied me back to the village. He evidently enjoyed being seen with a pastor.
"But tell me, why did you take a third wife?" I asked him.
"I did not take her. I inherited her from my later brother, including her children. Actually my older brother would have been next in line. But he is an elder. He is not allowed to sin by giving security to a widow."
I looked in his eyes. "Do you want to become a Christian?"
"I am a Christian." Omodo said without smiling.
What does it mean to take responsibility as a congregation for Omodo? I am sorry that I was not able to see Omodo again. Our conversation contains in a nutshell the main attitudes of polygamists toward the church. It is always healthy to see ourselves with the eyes of an outsider.
I asked myself: What would I have done if I were the pastor in Omodo's town? Let me share with you my thoughts and then ask for your criticism. They are based on many experiences in dealing with other polygamist families. Maybe you have better ideas than I have. Please, help me to help Omodo.
The trouble with Omodo is that, unlike Joseph or Elsie, he did not ask for help. But that does not mean that he is not in need of help. The fact that he did almost all the talking and hardly gave me a chance, proves his inner insecurity. His sarcasm showed me that deep down in his heart he was afraid of me.
In order to take this fear away, I accepted defeat. You will have noticed that I was a defeated person when I left him. If you want to win someone over, nothing better can happen to you than defeat. In the eyes of the world the cross of Jesus Christ was a defeat. Yet, God saved the world by this defeat. In talking with people we must remember this truth. We can easily win an argument, but lose a person. Our task is not to defend, but to witness.
Humble acceptance of defeat is often the most convincing testimony we can give for our humble Lord. It is the one thing which the other one does not expect. Counseling is not preaching at a short distance. It is ninety percent listening.
When I have a conversation like this I ask myself first of all, where is the other one right? I think Omodo is right in his criticism of contradictory church policies, which sometimes deny our own doctrines. We have made the church the laughing-stock of a potentially polygamous society. We have often acted according to the statement, "There are three things that last forever: faith, hope and love, but the greatest of them all is church order and discipline."
Some churches demand that a polygamous man separate himself from all his wives, some from all but one. Others demand that he keep the first one; others allow him to choose. Some allow that his wives stay with him under the condition that he has no intercourse with them.
Some do not even allow polygamists to enter the catechumen class. Others allow them, but do not baptize them. Again others baptize them, but do not give them communion. A few allow them full church membership, but forbid them to hold office.
The most generous solution was to baptize a polygamist only on his death bed. It happened to a Swedish missionary once that such a polygamist did not die but recovered after baptism. The church council decided, "Such things must not happen." They did not specify whether they referred to the recovery of the polygamist or to his baptism. We have made ourselves fools before the world with our policies. Let us admit honestly our helplessness first of all. We are facing a problem where we just do not know what to do.
Maybe our mistake is that we want to establish a general law for all cases. We want to be like God, knowing what is good and evil and have decided that monogamy is "good" and polygamy "evil" while the Word of God clearly does not say so. The Old Testament has no outspoken commandment against polygamy and the New Testament is conspicuously silent about it. Instead of dealing with polygamy, the Bible has a message for polygamists.
Therefore let us not deal with an abstract problem. Instead let us meet a concrete person. Let us meet Omodo. Is he a special case? Well, every one of us is a "special case" in one way or another. There are no two persons exactly alike. Still, if we can help in one case like that of Omodo's, we might find the key to deal with many others. So, what would I have done?
First of all, I would have gone back to visit him again. Church discipline, as the New Testament understands it, starts with me, not with the other one. If possible, I would have taken my wife along. I would have asked her to tell Omodo what she would think of me if I let her work all day in the garden, get wood and water, care for the children and prepare the food while I sit idly in the shade all day under the eaves of my hut and watch her work. I think she would have told him that he does not have three wives, but actually he has no wife at all. He is married to three female slaves. Consequently, he is not a real husband; he's just a married male. Only a real husband makes a wife a real wife.
In the meantime I would have talked to Omodo's first wife and told her precisely the same, that only a real wife makes a husband a real husband. I would have challenged her because she had not demanded enough from her husband. She had behaved like an overburdened slave trying to solve her problem by getting a second slave. Instead, she should have asked her husband to help her. She should have behaved like a partner and expected partnership.
She probably would have thought I was joking and not have understood at all. So I would have explained and we would have talked, visit after visit, week after week. Then finally I would have asked her why she ridiculed her husband. I am sure there was something deeper behind it, a concrete humiliation for which she took revenge, a hidden hatred.
At the same time, I would have continued to talk to Omodo -- not telling him anything which I had learned from his wife, but listening to his side of the story. I am sure I would have heard precisely the opposite of what his wife had said. I would have tried to make him understand his wife and to make his wife understand her husband. Then, maybe after months, I would have started to see them both together at the same time, possibly again accompanied by my wife.
The best way to teach marriage of partnership is by example. One day we were discussing this in our "marriage class," a one-year course I taught at Cameroon Christian College. The students were telling me that African women are just not yet mature enough to be treated as equal partners. While we were discussing this, rain was pouring down. We watched through the window of the classroom the wife of the headmaster of our primary schools, who jumped from her bicycle and sought refuge under the roof of the school building. After a little while a car drove up. Out stepped her husband. He handed her the car keys, and off she drove with the car, while he followed her on the bicycle getting soaked in the rain. This settled the argument. It is up to the husband to make his wife a partner.
Then, one day I would have attacked the case of the second wife. I can imagine her story. She probably was given into marriage with Omodo for a high bride price at a very young age. I would have tried to find out how she felt about her situation. Young and attractive as she was, I cannot imagine that she was so terribly excited by old fat Omodo. It is very likely that she had a young lover alongside. I have found that women in polygamous marriages often live in adultery, because their husbands, staying usually with one wife for a week at a time, are not able to satisfy them.
Solving the problem of the second wife would involve talks with her father and "fathers" and also with the young man she really loves. It would have been a hard battle, but I do not think a hopeless one. It is a question of faith. I would trust Jesus that He can do a miracle. I would ask some Christians in the congregation who understand the power of prayer to pray when I talk to the father. Every father wants to have a happy daughter. I would try to convince him to pay the bride price back to Omodo (or at least a part of it).
The first time I would have suggested to Omodo to let his second wife go, he probably would have thrown me out the front door. So I would have entered again through the back door. I would have tried to tire him out by an unceasing barrage of love.
It is very important that by now a very deep personal contact and friendship is established between Omodo and me, a "partnership in swimming." In this partnership Jesus Christ becomes a reality between us even when His name is not mentioned in every conversation.
One day, I think, Omodo would have admitted that he did not take his second wife just out of unselfish love for his first one, but that he considered his first wife as dark bread when he had appetite for a piece of candy.
Now, we could start to talk meaningfully about sin. Not about the sinfulness of polygamy, but about concrete sins in his polygamous state.
To talk to a polygamist about the sinfulness of polygamy is of as little help as talking to a soldier about the sinfulness of war or to a slave about the sinfulness of slavery. Paul sent the slave Onesimus back to his slave master, while at the same time he proclaimed a message incompatible with slavery which finally caused its downfall. Paul broke the institution of slavery from inside, not from outside. This is a law in God's kingdom which can be called the "law of gradual infiltration." It took centuries until slavery was outlawed. God is very patient. Why are we so impatient?
So I would have talked to Omodo about his selfishness. I would have talked to his first wife about her hatred, lies and hypocrisy and to the second one about her adultery. In the minute they began to see how these things separate them from God, it would not have been difficult to make them aware of their need of forgiveness. Then we could have talked about reconciliation with God. This reconciliation would have happened through the absolution. "He has enlisted us in this service of reconciliation." (2 Corinthians 5:18)
After the experience of the absolution, we would have tried together to find the will of God for each person involved. Would the separation of Omodo from his second wife be a divorce? It depends upon whether we consider polygamy also as a form of marriage.
Parenthetically, I believe we may have to. Let us be fair. Polygamy is not "permanent adultery" as a missionary once tried to tell me. Adultery is never permanent. It is a momentary relationship in secrecy with no responsibility involved. Polygamy, on the other hand, is a public state, often based on a legally valid contract. It involves life-long responsibility and obligations. If polygamy is marriage, separation is divorce.
If we compare marriage with a living organism, husband and wife can be compared with the two essential organs, the head and the heart. In all higher-developed organisms one head corresponds to one heart. Only primitive organisms are just a plurality of cells, as for example the Alga volvox globator. Parts of that organism are relatively independent from the whole. A tapeworm can be cut apart and the parts are still able to live. One could compare polygamy with a primitive organism, which has not yet reached the state in which one head corresponds to one heart. Still, a tapeworm is one organism as much as polygamy is marriage.
Our dilemma is that we want monogamy and we do not want divorce. Yet, in a polygamous situation we cannot have one without the other. There are situations in life where we have the choice between two sins and where the next step can only be taken in counting on the forgiveness of our crucified Savior. It is in such situations where Luther gave the advice in all evangelical freedom, "Sin bravely!" being guided by the love for your neighbor and by what is most helpful to that neighbor. For me, there is no doubt that in Omodo's case the most helpful solution for his second wife would be to marry the man she loves.
The case of Omodo's third wife, whom he had inherited from his late brother, is probably the most difficult one. In 0modo's case it was especially difficult, because she was blind. I would have gathered the elders of the church and explored possibilities with them on how to support her through congregational help in case she wanted to live independently. The way a congregation treats their widows is the best test of their willingness and ability to carry responsibility for the individual.
One question is still open: When would I have baptized Omodo? I do not know. One cannot answer this question theoretically. I hope you understand that what I have just described is not the work of an afternoon, but of months, maybe years. Under the condition that this work is done, the moment chosen for baptism is not of decisive importance. There are no chronological laws in the process of salvation.
I would not have baptized Omodo before he had an experience of private confession and absolution. But then, someplace along the way, I would have done it, asking God for guidance together with the congregation for the right moment.
We should get away from considering church discipline as a matter of sin and righteousness, but rather put it on the basis of faith and unbelief. Faith is not a nothing and the use of the sacraments is not a nothing. In case it would have taken years to find a solution for Omodo's wives, I would have expected such a solution as fruit of his baptism and not as a condition for it.
In the meantime, while working and praying for a solution, Omodo would have to "sin bravely," sensing his polygamous state more and more as a burden. As his brother in Christ, together with the congregation, I could only act then according to Galatians 6:2 which says: "Bear one another's burden and fulfill the law of Christ."
If we followed that course of action, would then the walls break and the church be flooded by polygamy? I do not believe so. For economic reasons, polygamy is on the retreat anyway in Africa. The current generation of Africans longs for a monogamous marriage of partnership. We overestimate ourselves if we always think we have to keep shoring up the walls so they won't break. The statement "God is a God of order" is not in the Bible. First Corinthians 14:33 reads, " God is not a God of disorder, but of peace."
Counseling the individual is putting congregational responsibility into practice. In the process of counseling, the unacceptable person is taken aside, away from the crowd, and unconditionally accepted. To help the individual in the name of the God of peace, we need both the rules and the exceptions. The counselor has to give himself into life with its many different situations and happenings and "swim" with his counselee. God is with them in the water.
Howard Culbertson, Southern Nazarene University, 6729 NW 39th, Bethany, OK 73008 | Phone: 405-491-6693 - Fax: 405-491-6658
Copyright © 2002 - Last Updated: October 10, 2011 | URL: http://home.snu.edu/~hculbert/trobisch.htm
You have permission to reprint what you just read. Use it in your ezine, at your web site or in your newsletter. Please include the following footer:
Article by Howard Culbertson. For more original content like this, visit: http://home.snu.edu/~hculbert

If you are in reasonably good health, preferably over age 18, and have the necessary time and energy, you can run a marathon.
Things You’ll Need:
- Establish a solid fitness base. From a recommended 15 to 20 miles a week, gradually build to a peak mileage range of 30 to 40 miles.
- Minimize the stress on your body by doing other sports, such as swimming or biking, especially after a long or hard run.
- Practice the hard/easy principle. Intersperse stress and rest by taking days off to recover and adapt to marathon training.
- Increase gradually. Up your training mileage by no more than 10 percent a week.
- Run at least three long runs, from 18 to 20 miles.
- Stick with 20 miles. Most experts say there is no reason to go beyond this amount in training, and the risk of injury increases with longer runs.
- Consider speed work. Faster running isn’t necessary for first-timers, but it can be useful. Make sure to consult an expert, such as a coach.
- Practice racing. Use shorter events to practice pacing and drinking, and to test running gear.
Tips & Warnings
- Find a friend or training group. Consider a training partner and/or a group to help get you through the long runs.
- Practice mentally as well as physically. The marathon can take enormous concentration. Visualize yourself successfully running it in training.
- Remember to stretch. This is important to maintain flexibility and prevent injuries. Stretching before training is a bonus, but it’s especially important after running.
- Study the distance. Read books and articles, and talk to experienced marathoners.
- If you have any condition that would impair or limit your ability to engage in physical activity, please consult a physician before attempting this activity. This information is not intended as a
substitue for professional medical advice or treatment.
How to Train for Your First Marathon,

THE USE OF BRAINSTORMING IN INCREASING STUDENT’S MOTIVATION IN SPEAKING ABILITY IN AL-MUHIBBIN JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL GRADE VIII
by: Iin Nurkhasanah
- I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background of the study
English is one of the most important subjects learned in almost all school in every country including Indonesia. The reason why it is important is that because English become an international language. People use English around the world. It is studied seriously because the language is becoming second language in almost all countries. People consciously take many courses and education of English because of an important of the language.
Many sectors in our daily life need English as the prerequisites. All job application will not be fulfilled without capability of English. People certainly realize and concern about the importance of English since mostly the widespread of the issue had English to become important object to be searched and mastered.
English is widely used in mass media and oral communication as means of exchanging information, including science and technology reasons. Harmer (2000:1) stated that English has become a lingua franca. It means that English is a means for people who have different language to communicate orally or written form. They use English to enable them to communicate and transfer information.
This paper highlights (1) The Use of brainstorming, (2) students’ motivation and (3) Speaking ability
1.2 Problem of the study
- What technique use in improving student’s speaking skill?
- How the use of brainstorming in correct procedure so that students are interesting to engaged with.
1.3 Objective of the study
- To know what technique use to improve students’ speaking skill.
- To know how to apply brainstorming in the class correctly.
1.4 Significance of the Study
This research is intended to offer an alternative technique in enhancing students’ speaking comprehension achievement since a good teacher of English is required to train the students by applying good strategies. The use of brainstorming can make the student feel convenient and confident to speak because the topic is already discussed or they have known before.
Based on the background of the study above, the hypotheses will be formulated the null hypothesis (Ho) and alternative hypothesis (Ha) as follows.
H0: There is no significant difference in average score in speaking between students who are taught using brainstorming technique and conventional technique.
H1: There is no significant difference in average score in speaking between students who are taught using brainstorming technique and conventional technique.
H0: There is no significant improvement in average score in speaking between students who are taught speaking using brainstorming technique.
H2 : There is a significant improvement in average score in speaking between students who are taught speaking using brainstorming technique.
H0 : There is no significant improvement in average score in speaking between students’ who are already taught speaking using brainstorming technique.
H3 : There is a significant improvement in average score in speaking between students’ who are already taught speaking using brainstorming technique.
H0 : There is no significant difference in average score in speaking between students’ after taught speaking using brainstorming technique.
H4 : There is no significant difference in average score in speaking between students’ after being taught speaking using brainstorming technique.
H0 : There is no significant difference in average score in speaking between students’ after being taught speaking using brainstorming technique.
H5 : There is a significant difference in average score in speaking between students’ after being taught speaking using brainstorming technique and conventional technique.
H0 : There is no significant difference in average score in speaking between students who are being taught speaking using brainstorming and conventional technique.
H6 : There is a significant difference in average score in speaking between students who are being taught speaking using brainstorming and conventional technique.
H0 : There is no interaction effect of using brainstorming technique and conventional technique towards students’ speaking achievements.
H7 : There is no interaction effect of using brainstorming technique and conventional technique towards students’ speaking achievements.
1.6 The Criteria for Testing Hypothesis
In this study, the hypothesis that has been formulated before, the writer used the critical value of t-table at the significance 0.05 is with n=30. If the value of t-obtained is higher than value of t-table, the alternative hypothesis 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 will be accepted and the null hypothesis will be rejected. And if the value of t-table is higher than value of t-obtained, they null hypothesis will be accepted and the alternative hypothesis 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 will be rejected. In variance analysis, at the significance 0.05 is with n=30.
- II. LITERATURE REVIEW
The Use of Brainstorming
Brainstorming is a group creativity technique designed to generate a large number of ideas for the solution of a problem. In 1953 the method was popularized by Alex Faickney Osborn in a book called Applied Imagination. Osborn proposed that groups could double their creative output with brainstorming.
Oxford defined that brainstorming is a way of making a group of people all think about something at the same time, often in order to solve a problem or to create good ideas.
Brainstorming is the name given to a situation when a group of people meet to generate new ideas around a specific area of interest. Using rules which remove inhibitions, people are able to think more freely and move into new areas of thought and so create numerous new ideas and solutions. The participants shout out ideas as they occur to them and then build on the ideas raised by others. All the ideas are noted down and are not criticized. Only when the brainstorming session is over are the ideas evaluated.
The other meaning of brainstorming is To brainstorm is to use a set of specific rules and techniques which encourage and spark off new ideas which would never have happened under normal circumstances. So there you have it: brainstorming will help you come up with new ideas. And not only will you come up with new ideas but you will do so with surprisingly little effort. Brainstorming makes the generation of new ideas easy and is a tried-and-tested process. Exactly what you apply brainstorming techniques to depends on what you want to achieve. You can apply them to develop new products, services and processes in your job, or you can apply them to develop your personal life.
There are two models of brainstorming
- Traditional Brainstorming
The normal view of brainstorming is where a group of people sit in a room and shout out ideas as they occur to them. They are told to lose their inhibitions and that no ideas will be judged so that people are free to shout out any ideas at all without feeling uncomfortable. People should build on the ideas called out by other participants. The purpose of this is to gain as many ideas as possible for later analysis. Out of the many ideas suggested there will be some of great value. Because of the free-thinking environment, the session will help promote radical new ideas which break free from normal ways of thinking.
- Advanced Brainstorming
The model we propose is an extension of the traditional brainstorming scenario and makes the whole process easier and more effective. Advanced brainstorming builds on the current methods of brainstorming to produce more original ideas in a more efficient way. Specialized techniques, better processes and better awareness, combined with new technologies make traditional brainstorming a less frustrating process. Most of the problems associated with traditional brainstorming disappear as a more effective process is used. Keep on reading for more details of how you can do advanced brainstorming for great profit to you and your organization.
Advanced brainstorming uses:
- new processes and new training to reduce inhibitions
- creative and lateral thinking techniques
- new materials for stimulation and recording ideas
Motivation in learning English
Motivation is the driving force which help causes us to achieve goals. Motivation is said to be intrinsic or extrinsic. According to various theories, motivation may be rooted in a basic need to minimize physical pain and maximize pleasure, or it may include specific needs such as eating and resting, or a desired object, goal, state of being, ideal, or it may be attributed to less-apparent reasons such as altruism, selfishness, morality, or avoiding mortality.
There are many things instructors can do to prevent glazed-over eyes or nodding heads in a classroom. Faculty can help maintain and increase student motivation by
- Establishing challenging, but not impossible goals for students. Offering intellectual tasks that are a “reach” can spur learners to higher levels of success.
- Helping students set their own goals for learning that are ambitious, but realistic and achievable. Research shows that, if given a choice, people will choose a challenging, though not daunting task over one that is too hard – or too easy. While it’s often helpful to offer an easy question first in a discussion or on an exam, it’s counterproductive to make everything too easy.
- Being clear, specific, and concrete in explaining course material and in giving examples.
- Organizing student learning; for example, consciously building new material on facts or concepts that students already know.
- Offering positive, consistent, and timely feedback – which doesn’t have to mean grades. A brief comment – if sincere – may suffice.
Engaging students in a variety of teaching activities, such as role-playing, problem-solving, or any kind of student interaction, especially if these activities can relate the course to students’ interests and skills. The key here is activity, as passivity can be an impediment to feeling motivated.
Speaking means to be able to use language (Oxford, 1986:6). According to Finnociaro and Brumfit (1983:1440) in Nurkhasanah speaking is one of the important language skills that have to be mastered by language learners. They consider that speaking skill is a complex skill, which involves the knowledge of sound, vocabulary and cultural sub-system of English language.
It means that the knowledge from pronunciation, structure, vocabulary and cultural system of English system are important and much needed for communicating to society.
According to Yorkey, speaking skill is a skill and like other skill, it must be practiced continuously. The teacher role is becoming important for students later. There are many keys to support speaking skill by listening cassette, watching tv, watching film, practicing with foreigners, practicing with partners.
Dobson is quoted by Fita Krisnawati in her thesis. Speaking is an ability when students can judge how accurate their selling and how they use the sentences they have learned and it merely different when it is conveyed to writing skill, they usually produce rather mistakes but in free speaking, they have tendency to make mistakes that they wouldn’t make in writing 2.
Speaking is easy, but conveys the speaking in to meaning is not easy. By having some experts’ statement and some guidance, the writer believes that speaking will easier when someone else opens a certain topic or do the brainstorming. Brainstorming can motivate student to speak because the way of brainstorming work is interesting. It can be compared to students who have no any topic to be talked, they will keep silent because they don’t know what should be talked, the feel afraid to speak, the afraid of making mistakes etc. The use of brainstorming is a good idea to convey students in speaking English everyday.
Nurkhasanah, iin.the effectiveness of teaching speaking through debate activity of eFAC course in Intermediate level.2007
Richard C Yorkey,”Study skill for students of English as a second language: New York :MC.Grow Hill, Inc,1990),
M Dobson, Teaching for skill,Teaching English Forum,XXIV January 1, 1989 p.30.quoted by Krisnawati in unpublished thesis
Jeffrey Baumgartner, the step by step guided by brainstorming.1997, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2006 bwiti BVBA Erps-Kwerps, Belgium
www.brainstorming.co.uk ©1997-2008 Infinite Innovations Ltd. All rights reserved.

Biological species emerge and disappear in the natural course of evolution. There have been times in the Earth’s past when mass extinctions have occurred, causing a large number of species to disappear in a short time. This is generally believed to have happened due to external pressures on ecosystems, or sudden shocks and catastrophic events. We are currently going through such a period due primarily to the impact humans have had on the environment, and on plant and animal habitats. Some scientists believe that 50% of existing species may become extinct in the next 100 years.
Credit: Wikimedia Commons

November 9, 2012
A couple of cups of coffee may help our brains process some words faster, a small experiment suggests. But we only get the message faster if the words are emotionally positive. The study included 66 healthy young men. They were told to consume no caffeine, nicotine or alcohol in the 12 hours before the experiment. The men were randomly divided into 2 groups. One group took a tablet containing 200 milligrams of coffee, about the amount in 2 to 3 cups of coffee. Each person in the other group received a placebo (fake) pill. Half an hour later, the men were given tests that involved being shown a series of real and invented words. They had to press buttons to indicate whether a word was real or not. Men who took the caffeine pills did this faster and more accurately for words with a positive emotional connotation. They did not perform better than men who got the placebo pills for recognizing neutral or negative words. The journal PLoS One published the study online. HealthDay News wrote about it November 8.
By Howard LeWine, M.D.
Harvard Medical School
What Is the Doctor's Reaction?
You often hear people say things like "Don't talk to me. I haven't had my coffee yet." Researchers from Germany offer us new insight into why we might feel that way. The study comes from the Department of Psychology at Ruhr University.
In general, people recognize and process the meaning of words faster if the words have a positive emotional slant. What these researchers found is that caffeine speeds up that link even more. But caffeine did not speed up how quickly people recognize and process emotionally neutral or negative words.
Low doses of caffeine tend to put you in a more positive mood. Caffeine also generally helps you do mental tasks faster and with fewer errors. Now we can add the faster processing of positively charged emotional content. These are good explanations for why you want that first cup of coffee before talking to anyone.
How caffeine affects the brain is not completely understood. But here is how most experts explain it.
Caffeine gets absorbed in the stomach and small intestine. It enters the blood stream and is distributed throughout the body, including the brain.
Once it reaches the brain, caffeine probably has multiple targets. But the main one seems to be adenosine receptors. Adenosine is a chemical that dampens brain activity. This counters the action of another brain chemical, dopamine.
Dopamine acts as a brain stimulant and mood enhancer. By hogging the adenosine receptor sites, caffeine doesn't allow adenosine to dampen brain activity. This puts the balance in favor of dopamine. It leads to feeling more awake and alert, with a more positive mood.
What Changes Can I Make Now?
Overall, coffee is generally safe when used in moderation. But the key word is moderation.
In some people, too much caffeinated coffee can raise blood pressure. Teenagers seem to be more susceptible to an increase in blood pressure from caffeine.
Coffee also can interfere with how well your body absorbs iron and calcium. But you need to drink a lot of coffee for it to greatly lower the amount of iron and calcium in your bloodstream. And it's not the caffeine that interferes with the absorption. It's related to another ingredient in coffee called phenolic acid. So decaf coffee also will decrease absorption of these minerals.
Depending on how you make your coffee, it can raise cholesterol levels a little. Again, it's not the caffeine that influences cholesterol levels. It's the coffee oil from the bean. If you boil or press your coffee, then the coffee oil gets into the brew. However, today most coffee in the United States is filtered through paper. And filtered coffee does not increase cholesterol levels.
So what's the bottom line? If you are already a coffee drinker, enjoy it. If you don't drink coffee, processing of words that convey positive emotions is not a good enough reason to start.
There's probably some amount of coffee (and other drinks containing caffeine) that carries a risk of real health hazards. I am still unclear as to what that level is for an otherwise healthy adult.
My advice: If even one cup of coffee makes you jittery or anxious, or interferes with sleep, that is one cup too many. I am honest with patients. I don't know if 10 cups of coffee per day is too much. I would not drink that much; 3 cups per day is my own limit.
What Can I Expect Looking to the Future?
The great majority of medical studies looking at coffee drinkers have shown better health outcomes for people who drink coffee. Almost none have suggested that coffee is bad for you. In fact, my personal limit of three cups per day may be too cautious. Maybe I'd be better off drinking more!

The well-being of people all over the world depends on the various goods and services provided by ecosystems, including food, fuel, construction materials, clean water and air, and protection from natural hazards. Ecosystems, however, are under increasing pressure from unsustainable use and other threats including outright conversion. To address this concern, IUCN promotes the sound management of ecosystems through the wider application of the Ecosystem Approach – a strategy for the integrated management of land, water and living resources that places human needs at its centre, through the Ecosystem Management Programme.
The Ecosystem Management Programme works on four key programmatic areas for IUCN:
- Drylands, where the programme aims to demonstrate the importance of dryland ecosystem services for livelihood improvement and for adapting to climate change.
- Climate Change, where the Climate Change Initiative aims to include biodiversity concerns in adaptation and mitigation polices and practice, as well as furthering natural resource management strategies that help biodiversity and people to adapt to the impacts of climate change. The Initiative coordinates Climate Change work across IUCN's programmes, regions, Commissions and member organizations.
- Islands, where the Islands Initiative focuses on addressing integrated management challenges for marine, coastal and terrestrial ecosystems, for the conservation of island biodiversity and the sustainable development of island communities, and facilitates IUCN’s work on islands across the Union.
- Disaster Risk Reduction, where the programme aims to promote integration of ecosystem management, livelihoods, community vulnerability and climate change adaptation to disaster management.
In addition, the Programme provides technical input on integrating wider ecosystem-scale biodiversity issues into IUCN’s programmes globally, regionally and nationally.
The Programme also serves as a focal point in the Secretariat for IUCN’s Commission on Ecosystem Management (CEM), a network of more than 800 volunteer ecosystem management experts from around the world. The Ecosystem Management Programme works in close collaboration with CEM to realize the Commission’s objectives in enhancing the implementation of the Ecosystem Approach. CEM members also contribute technical information to the Ecosystem Management Series: a compilation of best practices and lessons learnt in implementing the Ecosystem Approach.

The Enola Gay in History and Memory
by Christine Girardin
With the 60th anniversary of the atomic bombings fast approaching, commemorative events and symposia are being planned across the globe in places as diverse, yet symbolically significant, as Hiroshima, Nagasaki, Tinian, London, Tokyo, Washington, and Los Alamos. While forthcoming books by historians Tsuyoshi Hasegawa, Gerard DeGroot, and Martin Sherwin and Kai Bird will advance the scholarly criticism of the bombings and show that viable alternatives for quickly ending the war without a U.S. invasion of the Japanese homeland existed, the bombs' defenders, including Gen. Paul Tibbets, the pilot of the Enola Gay, will also be out in force. Tibbets, echoing a refrain made popular by President Harry Truman, insists that he never lost sleep over that decision. Interestingly, the 1952 Hollywood film, Above and Beyond, on which Tibbets consulted, shows him unable to sleep on the night before the bombing of Hiroshima as he grappled with the profound consequences of what he was about to do. As historian Peter Kuznick explains, those consequences included not only the wanton slaughter of over 200,000 people in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and the condemning of additional scores of thousands to a life of torment, but the inauguration of the nuclear era in a fashion that Truman and others understood could ultimately end life on the planet. The major mobilization this May around strengthening the Non- Proliferation Treaty during the review meetings at the United Nations is designed to reverse the spread of nuclear weapons and the further increase in nuclear weapons states to make sure that that dire prospect is never realized. Japan Focus introduction.
TITUSVILLE -- There were 12 men onboard the B-29 that dropped the world's first atomic bomb in war, annihilating 70,000 people that day in Hiroshima, Japan, and killing about 130,000 more in the aftermath. Historians still disagree about whether the bombing was necessary to prevent the loss of more lives in battle, but the man who flew the aircraft on Aug. 6, 1945, remains proud of his role in the closing days of World War II.
Col. Paul Tibbets with the Enola Gay on Tinian prior to takeoff for Hiroshima
"I regretted it was necessary, but to me it was necessary to do it. I tell everybody I never lost a night's sleep over it," said retired Gen. Paul W. Tibbets, who is telling tales of those heady days and meeting fans this weekend at the 28th annual Tico Airshow in Titusville.
Col. Paul W. Tibbets stands next to the B-29 Superfortress "Enola Gay" which he piloted over Hiroshima, Japan, Aug. 6 1945, to drop the world's first atomic bomb in combat.
Tibbets, 90, makes about a dozen appearances a year, promoting his book and talking about his place in military history. But the Enola Gay, and it's payload, Little Boy, weren't always something he talked about.
For the first 10 or 12 years after the war, nobody wanted to revisit the Manhattan Project and the two atomic bombs it produced -- at least not publicly. Everyone was just so tired of killing that talking about it was shunned, Tibbets said.
It was when the tide of public and scholarly opinion began to turn against the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki that Tibbets went on the offensive. Ever since, he's talked about the special B-29 developed under his supervision to carry Little Boy, and details about the bombing run into Japanese skies.
That bombing has been ranked as the most important news event of the 20th century, and one that changed humankind forever, said Peter Kuznick, director of the Nuclear Studies Institute at American University in Washington, D.C.
As a scholar who believes it probably wasn't necessary to drop the atomic bomb to end WWII, Kuznick said the ultimate lesson about the event is that once such terribly effective weapons are developed, they are extremely likely to be used.
Moral debates and a scientific awareness of potential long-term problems won't be enough to prevent their use, just as they weren't enough to stop President Harry S. Truman from giving the order to drop the bomb.
"He knew it wasn't just another bomb. He knew it wasn't just a bigger, more terrible bomb. He knew that he was beginning a process that could ultimately mean the annihilation of the human species," Kuznick said.
Proof of the bomb's destructive power is displayed in old photographs on the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum's Web site. Survivors closest to the blast, a little more than half a mile from the explosion's center, suffered severe burns. One woman is shown with the pattern of her kimono burned into her back. A Japanese child later wrote that the bomb turned people instantly into ghosts.
Despite the atomic bomb's aftermath, Tibbets said humankind may again witness nuclear destruction. But this time, it's difficult to know who's the enemy.
"There's gonna be some people who play with it. They're doing it now," he said.
Christine Girardin wrote this story for the News Journal, Daytona Beach, Florida, March 10, 2005.

|Title||Genetic heterogeneity in human disease.|
|Publication Type||Journal Article|
|Year of Publication||2010|
|Authors||McClellan, J, King, M-C|
|Date Published||2010 Apr 16|
|Keywords||CDCV, fitness effects, heritability, missing heritability, mutation, schizophrenia|
Strong evidence suggests that rare mutations of severe effect are responsible for a substantial portion of complex human disease. Evolutionary forces generate vast genetic heterogeneity in human illness by introducing many new variants in each generation. Current sequencing technologies offer the possibility of finding rare disease-causing mutations and the genes that harbor them.
Genetic heterogeneity in human disease.
For years, I've worked on their bones. Now I'm working on their genes. Read more about the science studying these ancient people.
From a finger bone of an ancient human came the record of a completely unexpected population. My lab is working on the science of the Denisova genome.
The advent of agriculture caused natural selection to speed up greatly in humans. We're uncovering some of the ways that populations have rapidly changed during the last 10,000 years.

Introduction / History
Jews represent the oldest monotheistic religion of modern times. Because of the uniqueness of their history and culture, all Jews have a strong sense of identity. Persecution of and discrimination against the Jews have been the historical reasons for their migrations and settlements around the world.
The Jews of Europe arrived on the continent at least 2,000 years ago during the early days of the Roman empire. Since then, they have been a significant influence in the history and culture of Europe. Much of what is considered "Jewish" today finds its roots among the European Jews.
One of the unique features among European Jews is the distinction between the Ashkenazic Jews and the Sephardic Jews. The word Ashkenaz is derived from a Biblical word for the larger Germanic region of Europe. Therefore, Ashkenazim Jews are those whose ancestry is linked to that area. This group traditionally speaks the Yiddish language, which is a German dialect that has Hebrew and Slavic elements. The word Sephard was the name used by Jews in medieval times for the Iberian peninsula. Sephardim Jews, then, are the descendants of the Jews who lived in Spain or Portugal prior to expulsion in 1492 by King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella. Sephardim also have a distinctive language called Ladino, or Judeo-Spanish. This is a dialect of Castilian Spanish with Hebrew and Turkish elements.
What are their lives like?
During the last few centuries, Eastern Europe had the largest Jewish population in the world. National attitudes toward the Jews were ambivalent, depending on the usefulness of the Jewish inhabitants to the nations' rulers. Anti-Semitism was prevalent and frequently led to either persecution or expulsion. The Holocaust of World War II was the climax of Jewish persecution in Europe, leading to the extermination of six million Jews. Many Eastern European countries lost the majority of their Jewish population in this tragedy.
As a result of the Holocaust, thousands of Jewish survivors and their descendants have emigrated from Eastern Europe to Israel, the United States, or Western Europe. The recent memories of the Holocaust as well as the centuries of discrimination and persecution play a strong part in modern Jewish identity. European Jews are strong supporters of "Zionism," a revival of Jewish culture and support of Israel as a national, secure, Jewish homeland.
Since the dissolution of the Soviet empire, former Soviet Jews no longer live under oppressive government rule. Anti-Semitism is still a concern, but Jewish life has been revitalized in recreated countries like the Ukraine. Synagogues are functioning and kosher (traditional, acceptable) food is once again available.
The Jewish emigration from Eastern Europe is cause for concern among the remaining aged Jewish population. As the older Jews die, the Jewish community dwindles. Many of the younger Jews are unlearned in their Jewish identity. They are either non-observant or have assimilated into the prevailing culture. However, strong efforts are being made to maintain a Jewish presence and clarify their identity. Jewish schools are being opened and Judaic studies are being promoted in universities. Jewish hospitals and retirement homes are being built. Community centers also promote cultural events such as the Israeli dance, theater, Yiddish and Hebrew lessons, and sports.
Western Europe now has the largest concentration of European Jewish residents. The Netherlands received a large influx of Sephardic Jews from Portugal in the late 1500's, and another contingent of Ashkenazic Jews after World War II. They have been very influential in the development of Dutch commerce. England's Jews are concentrated in the Greater London area and have been politically active for over 100 years. They have been avid supporters of Zionism and solidly committed to the settlement of Diaspora Jews in Israel. A large percentage of England's Jews are affiliated with the traditional Orthodox synagogues. Italy's Jewish population is primarily Sephardic due to its absorption of Spanish Jews in the 1500's. France's Ashkenazic community received 300,000 Sephardic Jews from North Africa in recent decades.
What are their beliefs?
For religious Jews, God is the Supreme Being, the Creator of the universe, and the ultimate Judge of human affairs. Beyond this, the religious beliefs of the Jewish communities vary greatly. European Jews are extremely diverse in religious practice. The Ashkenazic Jews are the most prevalent, representing the Orthodox, ultra-Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform movements. The unusual and adamantly traditional Hasidic movement was born in Poland and has gained a strong following in the United States and Israel. The Sephardic denomination is similar to the Orthodox Ashkenazic, but is more permissive on dietary rules and some religious practices. Each Jewish denomination maintains synagogues and celebrates the traditional Jewish holiday calendar. While most European Jews are religiously affiliated, there is a significant minority which is not religious.
What are their needs?
The Jews have a wonderful understanding of their connection with the Abrahamic covenant. However, they also have a history of rejecting Jesus Christ as Messiah, the one who has fulfilled that covenant. Pray that as the Gospel is shared, it will not be viewed as anti-Semitic, but rather as the fulfillment of what God promised through Abraham centuries ago.
Prayer PointsView Jew, Eastern Yiddish-Speaking in all countries.
* Ask the Lord of the harvest to send forth loving Christians to work among the Jewish communities.
* Ask the Holy Spirit to grant wisdom and favor to the missions agencies that are focusing on the European Jews.
* Pray that the Jewish people will understand that Jesus is the long-awaited Messiah.
* Ask the Lord to soften the hearts of the Jews towards Christians so that they might hear and receive the message of salvation.
* Pray that the Lord Jesus will reveal Himself to the Jews through dreams and visions.
* Pray that God will grant Jewish believers favor as they share their faith in Christ with their own people.
* Pray that strong local churches will be raised up in each Jewish community.
* Pray for the availability of the Jesus Film in the primary language of this people.

By Julie Steenhuysen
CHICAGO (Reuters) - In the latest installment in the mammogram debate, a new study finds that getting a mammogram every other year instead of annually did not increase the risk of advanced breast cancer in women aged 50 to 74, even in women who use hormone therapy or have dense breasts, factors that increase a woman's cancer risk.
The findings, released on Monday by researchers at the University California, San Francisco, support the conclusions of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an influential government panel of health advisers, which in 2009 issued guidelines that said women should have mammograms every other year starting at age 50 rather than annual tests starting at age 40.
The controversial recommendations to reduce the frequency and delay the start of mammogram screening were based on studies suggesting the benefits of detecting cancers earlier did not outweigh the risk of false positive results, which needlessly expose women to the anguish of a breast cancer diagnosis and the ordeal of treatment.
The matter, however, is not settled. The American Cancer Society still recommends women be screened for breast cancer every year they are in good health starting at age 40, but the group is closely watching studies such as this.
"I don't think any one study ought to change everything," Dr. Otis Brawley, chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society, said in a telephone interview. But he added, "This is one of several studies that are all pointing in the same direction over the last several years."
Brawley said he did not expect screening recommendations from professional organizations to change in the next year, but he does see doctors moving toward a more personalized approach over the next five years. There may be some women who need to be screened every six months and others every two years depending on their breast density, family history and genetic testing.
In the latest study, Dr. Karla Kerlikowske of the University of California, San Francisco, and colleagues wanted to see whether risk factors beyond a woman's age play a role in the decision of when to start mammogram screening.
In addition to age, the team considered whether women had dense breast tissue - which has a higher ratio of connective tissue to fat - or took combination estrogen and progesterone hormone therapy for more than five years, both of which can increase the risk of breast cancer.
"If you have these risk factors, would it help if you got screened annually vs. every two years?" said Kerlikowske, whose study was published online in JAMA Internal Medicine.
To study this, the team analyzed data from 11,474 women with breast cancer and 922,624 without breast cancer gathered from 1994 to 2008. Even after looking at these other factors, the team found no increased risk of advanced cancer in women 50 to 74 who got a mammogram every other year instead of every year.
"It didn't matter whether you screened that group every year or every two years, the risk of advanced disease or having a worse tumor was no different," Kerlikowske said.
More frequent screening in these women did result in more false-positive results. Women aged 50 to 74 who had annual mammograms had a 50 percent risk of having a false-positive result over a 10-year period, but a 31 percent risk when they were screened every other year.
Studies suggest a false positive can have lasting psychological effects. A March study in the Annals of Family Medicine said, "Three years after a false-positive ﬁnding, women experience psychosocial consequences that range between those experienced by women with a normal mammogram and those with a diagnosis of breast cancer."
Breast density was a factor in younger women, however. When the team looked at screening frequency in women 40 to 49, they found those with extremely dense breasts who were screened every other year had a higher risk of having a more advanced cancer than those who got screened every year. Younger women also were far more likely to have false-positive results and undergo unnecessary procedures.
Without getting a mammogram in their 40s, Kerlikowske said, "women aren't going to know if they have extremely dense breasts."
Among women in their 40s, about 12 percent to 15 percent have extremely dense breast tissue. For these women, Kerlikowske said she recommends that they get a mammogram if they have other risk factors that might put her at risk of breast cancer, including having a first-degree relative that a common term, or just "close relative"? such as a mother or a sister with breast cancer.
"Once we see their breast density is high, we will offer annual mammography," she said.
The American College of Radiology and the Society of Breast Imaging, groups that represent radiologists, said the study's methodology was flawed because it used early and late breast cancers to determine the outcomes of breast screening rather than more refined measures of tumor size, nodal status and cancer stage, which could determine whether screening detected cancers at an earlier stage.
It also faulted the study for not being a closely controlled, randomized clinical trial. The study used data from the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium, a national mammography screening database that gathers information from community mammography clinics on millions of women.
"We're never going to have a randomized study. This is the best in terms of the type of study anyone can actually hope for," said Brawley, whose group monitors scores of breast studies from around the world each year. He said such a study would take decades and would be prohibitively expensive.
Catching cancers earlier does not always translate into lives saved, according to a November study published in the New England Journal of Medicine by Dr. Gilbert Welch of the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy & Clinical Practice in New Hampshire.
That study suggested that as many as a third of cancers detected through routine mammograms may not be life-threatening, contradicting the deeply ingrained belief that cancer screening is always good.
Kerlikowske said the strength of her study is that it allows researchers to consider other risk factors, such as breast density, allowing doctors to offer women personalized choices about when to start breast cancer screening.
"We're trying to move it away from this idea that it all should be based on age. There should be some thoughtfulness to it," she said.
(Reporting by Julie Steenhuysen; Additional reporting by Bill Berkrot; Editing by Jilian Mincer and Douglas Royalty)

INDO-CHINA: The New Frontier
TIME. Monday, May. 29, 1950
The U.S. now has a new frontier and a new ally in the cold war. The place is Indo-China, a Southeast Asian jungle, mountain and delta land that includes the Republic of Viet Nam and the smaller neighboring Kingdoms of Laos and Cambodia, all parts of the French Union.
For more than three years this land, in prewar times the rich French colony of Indo-China, has been suffering, on a lesser scale, the ruinous kind of civil war which won China for Communism. The Mao Tse-tung of the Indo-Chinese is a frail, but enduring comrade, who looks like a shriveled wizard; his nom de guerre is Ho Chi Minh (or One Who Shines). Chiang Kai-shek has no counterpart in Indo-China. The initial brunt of the Red attack has been borne by French soldiers. Meanwhile, the job of rallying native anti-Communist forces falls mainly on the meaty shoulders of the Emperor Bao Dai (or Guardian of Greatness), who now bears the official title of Chief of State of Viet Nam.
While the dust of the Chinese civil war was settling before the bemused eyes of the State Department, the U.S. paid scant attention to the Indo-Chinese struggle. It seemed largely a local affair between the French and their subjects. Since the dust has settled in China, Asia’s Communism is thrusting southward. Indo-China stands first on the path to Singapore, Manila and the Indies (see map).
Last January, led by Peking and Moscow, the world’s Communist bloc recognized Ho Chi Minh’s “Democratic Republic.” It was more than the Kremlin had ever done for the Communist rebels of Greece. Over the past several weeks, arms and other supplies were reported passing from Russia and China to the comrades in Indo-China. The stakes in Southeast Asia were big—as big as the global struggle between Communism and freedom.
A fortnight ago in Paris, U.S. Secretary of State Dean Acheson drew a line in the dust that has so long beclouded U.S. diplomacy. He implicitly recognized that the war in Indo-China is no local shooting match. He pledged U.S. military and economic aid to the French and Vietnamese. The U.S. thus picked up the Russian gauntlet.
What kind of frontier and what kind of ally had history chosen for the U.S.?
A Golden Asset. Unlike China, where U.S. traders and missionaries began a fruitful acquaintance more than a century ago, Indo-China has had little contact with Americans, either commercial, cultural or diplomatic.* The last comprehensive U.S. book on the country was published in 1937. Among other things, its author observed: “IndoChina lies too far off the main scene of action to play any but a secondary role in the Pacific drama.”
In the pre-French past, most of Indo-China had been conquered by the Chinese, who had left their culture indelibly behind.† Through the last half of the 19th. Century, the French converted Indo-China into a tight, profitable colonial monopoly. They explored its fever-laden jungles, lofty ranges, great river valleys. They discovered its antiquities, including the majestic loth Century towers of Angkor Wat in northern Cambodia. They wrote about its mandarins, its Buddhist temples and Confucian family life.
The French invested $2 billion, built up Indo-China’s rice and rubber production; before World War II, the colony, along with Siam and Burma, was one of the world’s three leading rice exporters. Its surplus went to rice-short China, a fact of great significance these days in Communist China’s support of Communist Ho Chi Minh. All the raw rubber France needed came from Indo-China. There were other lucrative items: coal, wolfram, pepper, opium (which, to French shame, was sold to the natives through a state monopoly) and many jobs for a white bureaucracy. French politicians called the colony “our marvelous balcony on the Pacific.”
A Dangerous Liability. Indo-China is no longer a golden asset for France. As everywhere in the East, the old colonialism has died beneath the impact of Western nationalist, egalitarian ideas, a process greatly hastened by the Japanese march in World War II under the slogan “Asia for the Asiatics.” The French have bowed grudgingly to the times.
In an agreement signed March 8, 1949 with Bao Dai, they promised limited freedom for Viet Nam within the French Union. Under its terms, a Viet Nam cabinet has charge of internal affairs, the right to a national army. Paris keeps direct control of foreign policy, maintains military bases and special courts for Frenchmen, retains a special place for French advisers and the French language.
By that time the French were up to their necks in a costly campaign to crush Ho Chi Minh and his Communist bid for power. The civil war has cut rice production in half and disrupted the rest of Indo-China’s economy. It has tied down 130,000 French troops, about half of the Fourth Republic’s army, and thereby weakened the contribution France might make to Western Europe’s defense. In lives, the Indo-China war has cost the French 50,000 casualties. In money, it has cost $2 billion—just about the sum of ECAid to France.
Indo-China, in brief, has become a dangerous liability for France— nor does any realistic Frenchman think it can ever again be an asset. Why, therefore, spend more blood and treasure in thankless jungle strife? Why not pull out?
The answer is: more than French war weariness and prestige are at stake. If Indo-China falls to Communism, so, in all probability”, will all of Southeast Asia.
For U.S. citizens, the first fact about their new frontier is that it will cost money to hold—much more than the French can pay alone, much more than the $15 million in arms and $23 million in economic aid thus far promised by Washington. The second fact is more compelling : the new frontier, if it is not to crumble, may need U.S. troops as well as French.
Otherwise, the U.S. might surfer another catastrophic defeat in the Far East.
A Question of Sympathy. The French have made more than the usual colonial mistakes. All too often, especially since they put the Foreign Legion and its German mercenaries to the work of restoring order after World War II, they have been arrogant and brutal toward the Indo-Chinese. They are paying for it now, for the bulk of Communist Ho Chi Minh’s support comes from anti- French, or anti-colonial Indo-Chinese. A sign over an Indo-Chinese village street tells the story; it reads “Communism, No. Colonialism, Never.”
But the issue of native sympathy is complex. The vast majority of the people are simple rice farmers, who want peace and order so they may tend their paddy-fields. Ho Chi Minh himself does not now preach Communism openly: his explanation is that his people have no understanding of the word. Besides a crude, hate-the-French appeal (including atrocity propaganda—see cut), he has another effective persuasion: terror. His guerrillas and underground operators stalk the countryside; his assassins and bomb-throwers terrorize the cities. Indefatigably he spreads the word that he is winning, as his comrades have won in China.
The result is that many are cowed into helping him, or at least staying out of the anti-Communist effort. Others, especially among the intelligentsia, sit on the fence, waiting to jump on the winning side. This is where Bao Dai comes in.
A Display of Strength. It is Bao Dai’s mission, and the U.S.-French hope, to rally his countrymen to the anti-Communist camp of the West. In this undertaking he needs time. “Nothing can be done overnight,” he says. He needs time to organize an effective native government, train an army and militia that can restore order in the villages, win over the doubting fence-sitters among the intelligentsia. Besides a military shield, he also needs a display of winning strength and patient understanding by his Western allies.
As a national leader, Bao Dai has his weaknesses, and largely because of them he does not enjoy the kind of popularity achieved by India’s Jawaharlal Nehru. But, as the lineal heir of the old monarchs of Annam, he is his nation’s traditional “father & mother,” its first priest (Buddhist) and judge. The French say that Bao Dai should act more decisively; whenever he does, there is impressive popular response.
Nehru’s government of India, trailed by Burma’s Thakin Nu, Indonesia’s Soekarno and even by the Philippines’ Elpidio Quirino, has so far refused to follow the major Western democracies in recognizing Bao Dai’s Viet Nam Republic. They look on him as a French puppet. But Bao Dai has shown a judgment on the crucial ideological conflict of his time that compares strikingly and favorably with the petulant, third-force position of Pandit Nehru.
Recently, for example, Bao Dai told a TIME correspondent about his impressions of Ho Chi Minh in 1946, when both leaders were cooperating with the French to establish a new Viet Nam regime.
“At first,” recalled Bao Dai, “we all believed the Ho government was really a nationalistic regime . . . I called Ho ‘Elder Brother’ and he called me ‘Younger Brother.’ . . .
“Then, I saw he was fighting a battle within himself. He realized that Communism was not best for our country. But it was too late. He could not overcome his own allegiance to Communism.”
A Royal Notion. Bao Dai is essentially a product of the old French colonialism—the best of it thwarted by some of the worst.
Born in 1913, the only son of the ailing Emperor Khai Dinh, he studied under Chinese tutors until nine. Then his father’s French advisers decided he should go to France for a Western education.
The emperor put on a parasol-shaped red velvet hat and a golden-dragon robe, accompanied his son on the first trip abroad for any of their dynasty. In Paris he put the prince under the tutelage of former Annam Governor Eugene Charles. “I bring you a schoolboy,” said Khai Dinh. “Make of him what you will.” Three years later, Khai Dinh died. He was buried in a splendid mausoleum, at Hué; at the foot of his tomb lay his prized French decorations, toothbrush, Thermos bottles and “Big Ben” alarm clock. Bao Dai, who had come ‘home for the funeral, was crowned the 13th sovereign of the Nguyen (pronounced New Inn) dynasty. He turned the throne over to a regent, and hurried back to Paris.
The young Emperor continued his Chinese lessons, studied Annamite chronicles, browsed through French history, literature and economics. He was especially fond of books on Henry IV, the dynast from Navarre who began the Bourbon rule in France with the cynical remark, “Paris is worth a Mass,” and the demagogic slogan, “Every family should have a fowl in the pot on Sunday.” Bao Dai put his money in Swiss banks (and thereby saved it from World War II’s reverses), collected stamps, practiced tennis with Champion Henri Cochet, learned ping-pong, dressed in tweeds and flannels, vacationed in the Pyrenees, scented himself heavily with Coty and Chanel perfumes.
Up to this point the Emperor had absorbed a good deal of the education of an intelligent, progressive French adolescent. He had high notions of applying what he had learned back home.
In 1932, at 19, Bao Dai formally took over the Dragon Throne at Hué; two years later he married beautiful Mariette-Jeanne Nguyen Huu Thi Lan, the daughter of a wealthy Cochin-Chinese merchant. The Empress Nam Phuong was a Roman Catholic, educated at Paris’ Convent “Aux Oiseaux.”
Bao Dai reigned but he did not rule. The French (Third Republic and Vichy) shrugged off his earnest pleas for social and economic reforms and more native political autonomy. Cleverly, as they thought, they encouraged the Emperor to devote himself to sport and pleasure.
Bao Dai was hunting tigers near his summer villa at Dalat when the Japanese, early in 1945, made their 1940 control of the colony official and complete. They surprised his party, took him prisoner, installed him as a puppet emperor—until their own capitulation to the Allies a few months later.
Agitator Ho. At this point, the lines of Bao Dai’s destiny first crossed those of his fellow Annamite Ho Chi Minh.
The two men made a dramatic contrast. The Emperor was young (then 32), plump, clean-shaven, bland-faced, fond of snappy Western sport clothes. Ho was aging (55), slight (hardly 5 ft. tall), goat-bearded, steelyeyed, usually seen in a frayed khaki tunic and cloth slippers. Ho Chi Minh, too, had gone to France for education. As a young man, he had been sent into exile by the French police of Indo-China because of his family’s nationalist agitation. His father and a brother went to political prison for life. A sister received nine years of hard labor.
In Paris, Ho (then known as Nguyen Ai Quoc) became a photographer’s assistant, wrote anti-imperialist articles. He also joined the French Communist Party. He was sent to Moscow for training, became a Comintern functionary, re-emerged in 1925 at Canton, where he helped Russian Agent Borodin in Communism’s first attempt to seize China.
From Hong Kong in 1931 Ho Chi Minh organized the first Indo-Chinese Communist Party. The British clapped him into jail for a year. When he came out, he continued organizing Red cells in his country. Japan and World War II gave him his big chance.
Using popular front-tactics, Ho established the Viet Minh—League for the Independence of Viet Nam. It directed guerrilla war against both Vichy French and Japanese, enlisted the support of many Indo-Chinese nationalists. American OSS agents and arms were parachuted to Ho’s side.
“Uncle Ho.” By the time the French were ready to pick up the postwar strings again in Indo-China, Communist Ho was very much a popular hero, better known as “Uncle Ho.” He spoke a “soft” Communist line, talked more about freedom, democracy and reform. Bao Dai was in a different position. He had suffered in reputation because he had “gotten along” with Vichy French and Japanese.
The returning French began negotiations with the Viet Minh leader. There were polite hints that Bao Dai must go—he was too “unpopular.” Bao abdicated, and Ho was in the saddle.
Bao Dai stayed on in Indo-China for a while, as plain citizen Nguyen Vinh Thuy and Honorary Councilor to the Republic. Nobody had much use for him. He went abroad and flung himself into a reckless round of pleasure and sport.
Playboy. Most of his time he spent at Cannes, on the French Riviera, where he had bought the palatial Château de Thorenc (reported purchase price: $250,000). In his garage were a pale blue Lincoln convertible, a black Citroen limousine, a blue Simca “Gordoni” one-seat racer, a sleek Italian two-seater, a Simca-8 sports model. He also kept several motorcycles. He insisted that every engine run “as accurately as a watch.”
He dallied in the bars and casinos, chain-smoked cheap Gauloise cigarettes, treated hangers-on to champagne and caviar, played roulette for 10,000-franc chips (“His Majesty’s losses,” remarked a croupier, “befitted his rank”), sometimes conducted jazz bands, sent his secretary to open negotiations with the many women who caught his eye. (“My grandfather had 125 wives and 300 children,” Bao Dai once remarked to a journalist. “I have a few mistresses. What then?”) He played golf capably and bridge like a master. A crack shot with rifle or revolver, he often arranged target competitions with the château’s servants.
Meanwhile the French, back in Indo-China, had broken with Ho Chi Minh, were floundering in a Communist-led nationalist uprising. They appealed to Bao Dai to come home again and help rally his people against the Red menace. They promised to grant Viet Nam gradual independence within the new French Union. Bao was persuaded. On March 8, 1949, he signed the document creating the new Indo-Chinese Republic which he would head as chief of state. As he left the gaudy safety of the Riviera for the hazards of a country torn by civil war, he grinned and said: “I risk my skin.” French Communists snarled: “Cet empereur des boites de nuit [this nightclub emperor].”
Behind him, at the Château de Thorenc, he left Empress Nam Phuong and their family of two boys and three girls.
Statesman. Bao Dai has been back in Indo-China about a year. He has made some progress, but it is slow and the difficulties are enormous. The French have promised his government more authority, but they are vague in making good and sometimes stupidly petty. One point of friction between Bao Dai and French High Commissioner Léon Pignon concerns the high commissioner’s residence in Saigon. It is the old imperial palace, and the symbol, in native eyes, of paramount place. Bao Dai wants it for his own use, and he stays away from the city lest he lose face by residing elsewhere. The French, with bureaucratic pigheadedness, have refused to part with it, though there are reports that they will soon do so.
Another disappointment has been Bao Dai’s effort to enlist capable ministers and lower-echelon administrators. Partly this is because so many Vietnamese are fence-sitters or fear the terror of Viet Minh agents. Partly it is a consequence of French failure, in the past and at present, to train enough natives to take over the government. Bao Dai seems to be counting on U.S. pressure to loosen up the French in this respect.
Most serious failure is the sluggish pace in recruiting a Viet Nam army. Bao Dai’s government has thus far assembled only four battalions, about 4,000 men.
Field of Decision. Though Ho Chi Minh’s forces (70,000 regulars with equipment as good as the French, plus 70,000 well-trained guerrillas and an unknown number of poorly equipped village militia) have been pushed back from such centers as Hanoi in northern Viet Nam, French officers report that “the situation steadily grows no better.”
French Commander in Chief Marcel Carpentier aims to sweep Ho Chi Minh’s men from the lower, heavily populated Mekong and Red River valleys. These are the best rice-producing areas and consequently the best source of rebel supply. By airlift and truck convoy, the French maintain a line of forts at the Chinese border, where aid could flow in for Ho.
It is rugged hit & run fighting in forest and swamp terrain well suited for guerrilla tactics. By day the French control about half the countryside; and if they want to, they can penetrate where they will, though ambush takes its toll. At night, however, the French draw into their forts and garrisoned centers. Then Ho Chi Minh’s men steal forth, terrorize peasants, collect taxes (two-fifths of a farmer’s rice harvest), and run the countryside almost everywhere
The French insist that the military problem is the No.. i problem, and that Western men and arms must lick it. Given sufficient U.S. equipment, up to $150 million a year or more, they think they can crush Ho Chi Minh within three years. Lacking such support, they may be facing a debacle within one year; and, of course, down in the wreckage would go Bao Dai.
The Piecemeal Approach. All in all, the new U.S. ally in Southeast Asia is a weak reed. And the alliance is as ironic as anything in history. For the same U.S. Government which abandoned the Chinese Nationalists because they were not good enough was committed by last fortnight’s decision to defend a playboy emperor and the worst and almost the last example of white man’s armed imperialism in Asia.
Nevertheless, Indo-China had to be defended—if it could be defended. So had Formosa, last stand of China’s Nationalists, which has advantages not to be found in Indo-China—a strong government, a well-trained defending fighting force, and easily defensible tactical position. The U.S. decision to go into such a doubtful project as the defense of Indo-China was the result of an idea that it ought to do something, somehow, to stop the Communists in Southeast Asia. But the U.S. policy in Indo-China was a piecemeal operation. Not until it saw the Southeast Asia problem whole, until it went to the help of all threatened governments, would the U.S. be making soldier’s or statesman’s sense.
* There was one abortive attempt to get acquainted in the 18305, when President Andrew Jackson sent Envoy Edmund Roberts of New Hampshire to draw up a treaty with Emperor Ming Mang. Reported Roberts: “The insulting formalities required as preliminaries to the treaty . . . left me no alternative save that of terminating a protracted correspondence marked . . . by duplicity and prevarication in the official servant of the Emperor.” Roberts was told to 1) make five kowtows, 2) beg for “deep condescension,” 3) change a sentence in President Jackson’s letter to the Emperor from “I pray to God” to “I pray to the gods of heaven.” He refused.
† The Chinese invasions took place between 213 B.C. and 186 A.D. From the latter date until the loth Century the Chinese governed the country. Then the Annamites threw off the Chinese yoke; it was clapped on again for a brief span in the 15th Century. French missionaries and traders (preceded by the Portuguese and Dutch) came to Indo-China in the 17th Century. In 1802, a French East India Company expedition helped establish Nguye
INDO-CHINA: The New Frontier

A testosterone test measures the blood level of the male sex hormone testosterone. Testosterone, which plays an important role in sexual development, is produced mainly by the testes in boys and in much smaller amounts by the ovaries in girls. Testosterone is also produced by the adrenal glands in both girls and boys.
In young boys, testosterone levels are normally low. As puberty approaches — usually between the ages of 10 and 14 — the pituitary gland (a pea-sized gland near the base of the brain) secretes two hormones (luteinizing hormone, or LH; and follicle-stimulating hormone, or FSH) that work together to stimulate the testes to make testosterone.
Increased testosterone production is what causes boys to develop deeper voices, bigger muscles, and body and facial hair. It also helps the testes produce sperm, and it plays a role in speeding a boy's growth in height during puberty.
Two separate assessments may be performed as part of a testosterone test:
total testosterone, which measures the entire amount of testosterone in the body, including both the amount bound to proteins that help transport the hormone through the bloodstream and free testosterone
free testosterone, which measures only the testosterone that's not attached to proteins
The doctor may order one or both tests. However, because sexual development involves many other hormones, a more complete picture can often be obtained by performing other tests at the same time, including an LH or FSH test. For example, low levels of testosterone can be due to a problem with the testes' production of testosterone or to the pituitary gland not making enough of the hormones that stimulate the testes to produce testosterone.
Why It's Done
Doctors may order a testosterone blood test if a boy appears to be entering puberty earlier or later than expected. High levels are associated with precocious (early) puberty, while low levels may indicate a delay in sexual development. In girls, high levels can be associated with the appearance of masculine characteristics, such as facial hair.
The test may also be used in either boys or girls to check for damage or disease of the testes, ovaries, adrenal glands, or pituitary gland, or to check for steroid use.
In teens and adults, testosterone levels can help doctors evaluate fertility or menstrual problems and sexual function.
No special preparations are needed for this test. The doctor may want to perform the test in the morning, when testosterone levels usually are highest.
On the day of the test, it may help to have your child wear a short-sleeve shirt to allow easier access for the technician who will be drawing the blood.
A health professional will clean the skin surface with antiseptic, and place an elastic band (tourniquet) around the upper arm to apply pressure and cause the veins to swell with blood. Then a needle is inserted into a vein (usually in the arm inside of the elbow or on the back of the hand) and blood is withdrawn and collected in a vial or syringe.
After the procedure, the elastic band is removed. Once the blood has been collected, the needle is removed and the area is covered with cotton or a bandage to stop the bleeding. Collecting blood for this test will only take a few minutes.
What to Expect
Collecting a sample of blood is only temporarily uncomfortable and can feel like a quick pinprick. Afterward, there may be some mild bruising, which should go away in a few days.
The blood sample will be processed by a machine and the results are commonly available after a few days.
The testosterone test is considered a safe procedure. However, as with many medical tests, some problems can occur with having blood drawn:
fainting or feeling lightheaded
hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin causing a lump or bruise)
pain associated with multiple punctures to locate a vein
Helping Your Child
Having a blood test is relatively painless. Still, many children are afraid of needles. Explaining the test in terms your child can understand might help ease some of the fear.
Allow your child to ask the technician any questions he or she might have. Tell your child to try to relax and stay still during the procedure, as tensing muscles and moving can make it harder and more painful to draw blood. It also may help if your child looks away when the needle is being inserted into the skin.
If You Have Questions
If you have questions about the testosterone test, speak with your doctor.

12. June 2012 10:55
Retinal hemorrhage occurs when the blood vessels in the retina get damaged or ruptured, leading to abnormal bleeding. The retina, which is composed of rods and cones is the region of the eye responsible for sensitivity to light, and vision. The retinal vein and artery, along with a dense network of capillaries, are responsible for transmitting the blood supply to the retina. When these blood vessels are damaged, due to any reason, this affects the blood supply to the retina, which in turn leads to a decrease in visual acuity. Diabetic retinopathy is the leading cause of blindness in people aged between 20 and 65.
The dense network of cells in the retina is extremely sensitive, and can be damaged with even a slight trauma.
The causes due to which this damage might occur include:
- High blood pressure
- Forceful blows in the head region
- Child abuse in infants
- Improper development of blood vessels in infants born prematurely
- Blurred vision
- Spotted vision
- Lines in the field of vision
- Blind spots
- Distorted vision
- Progressive vision loss
- The disease is diagnosed by an ophthalmologist, who uses an opthalmoscope to examine the internal structure of the eye.
- Another method that is commonly used to detect the abnormalities in the blood vessels is a fluorescein angiography test, in which a fluorescent dye is injected into the patient’s bloodstream, after which photographs are clicked to view the blood vessels.
- In some cases, the physician might also order for a blood test to be performed.
- The disorder is self-limiting in most patients, with more than 85% cases healing on their own.
- The most common treatment for retinal hemorrhages is laser treatment, in which a laser beam is used to remove the affected blood vessels.
- If the disease is caused by some underlying medical condition like diabetes or hypertension, the treatment focuses on eliminating that disorder.
- Injection of anti-VEGF drugs like Avestin has been found to be effective in the treatment of hemorrhages associated with the growth of new vessels.
- The administration of various nutritional and herbal supplements like antioxidants, omega-3-rich foods, antioxidant vitamins, zinc, lutein, pine bark extract, grape seed extract, etc. has also been found to be effective in improving the symptoms of the disease.
We at Killeen Eyecare center are renowned throughout Killeen for providing the highest quality eye care to all our patients. We help them maintain healthy eyes and treat various eye diseases using most sophisticated instruments. For more details, you can visit us at 416 North Gray Street, Killeen, TX 76541, Downtown Killeen or call at 254-634-7805.
Eye Doctor Killeen - Eye Doctor Fort Hood

By Chris Wickham
LONDON (Reuters) - Scientists in Switzerland have come up with a material mimicking the way tendons connect to bones, which could speed the development of stretchy, wearable electronic devices.
The stretchable electronics industry is in its infancy but devices that are able to flex without breaking could revolutionize devices from smartphones and solar cells to medical implants.
Futurists have long predicted clothes with sensors that monitor the vital signs of the wearer, or smartphones and screens woven into the fabric of shirts or jackets.
But while circuits and wiring are quite happy on rigid surfaces like those in a tablet computer, they break easily when combined with materials that stretch.
"You have two materials with very different mechanical properties," Andre Studart, a researcher at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich, told Reuters. "The challenge is to bridge these different properties."
Studart and his team have overcome the problem with a stretchy material made from polyurethane that contains "islands" stiff enough to house and protect delicate circuits.
While the soft part can stretch by 350 percent, the stiff regions created by impregnating the material with tiny platelets of aluminum oxide and a synthetic clay called laponite, hardly deform and can protect the electronics.
The material, presented in research published in the journal Nature Communications, is made from bonded layers and because the concentration of the platelets is gradually increased, the junction between the stretchy and stiff parts is also durable.
"There are many biological materials that have these properties as well, like the way tendons link muscle to bone," said Studart. "But there are not so many examples in synthetic materials."
One of the companies trying to commercialize stretchable electronics is MC10 Inc, a Massachusetts-based start-up born out of research by John Rogers and his team at the University of Illinois.
The firm recently announced plans to start selling a sensor-laden, flexible skullcap that monitors impacts to the head during sports. It was developed with Reebok and goes on sale next year.
Amar Kendale, the company's strategist, said the skullcap gives a level of contact with the head that previous attempts to put sensors in helmets or gum shields have not been able to achieve.
MC10 is using a different approach from the Zurich team. The company uses extremely thin silicon chips sandwiched in a stretchable polymer and connected by tiny wires in a concertina configuration that can stretch about 60 percent, about the same as the body's soft tissues.
MC10 has also developed a balloon catheter with built-in electronic sensors for heart patients, which researchers plan to start testing on people in the next year or so.
"Decorating the surface of the balloon with sensors or a mechanism that delivers energy gives a good way of delivering therapy to soft tissue, like the heart, to correct arrhythmia," Kendale said.
Market potential is difficult to estimate but Kendale said the technology could be applied to the monitoring and management of chronic diseases from diabetes to hypertension.
The Swiss researchers say their technique could also be used to build synthetic cartilage or false teeth with better matches to their natural counterparts.
Currently the ceramics used for dental fillings are so hard they can damage natural teeth if a patient bites too hard. And one treatment for women with crumbling vertebrae from osteoporosis involves injecting a stiff polymer that over time can damage the surrounding healthy vertebrae.
"The problem is that it is equally stiff everywhere," said Studart. "The vision is that you will be able to make materials that are as heterogeneous as the biological ones."
(Editing by David Holmes)

Fertilizer Facts: April 1997, Number 15
Response of Oat to Water and Nitrogen
Land Resources and Environmental Sciences Dept.
Montana State University
Nitrogen (N) is the most common nutrient that limits oat production in Montana. Deficiency symptoms are frequently characterized by general chlorosis (yellowing) of leaves and a reduction in overall plant vigor and growth. Oat N deficiency symptoms, as with other cereal grains, will most often appear in the early to late spring depending on severity. Once present, symptoms become more severe through vegetative growth stages. At flowering, N deficient plants are stunted and have fewer tillers and smaller heads than healthy plants. Grain yield is reduced primarily through a reduction in kernels per head and head density.
Nitrogen typically represents a grower's largest fertilizer input cost. Current fertilizer N recommendations in Montana are based on an average relationship between N requirement (NR) and estimated yield potential [Yield potential (bu/a) x 1.1 = NR (lbs/a)] (Table 1). The recommendation assumes 1.1 lbs N/a are needed to produce each bushel of grain. However, this relation may vary with growing season and the yield potential at an individual site. Since yield potential is most closely associated with available water (stored soil water + growing season precipitation), we were interested in determining the effects of available water supply on the N requirement and oat yield potential.
Field experiments were conducted on a Lohmiller silty clay loam (Ustic Torrifluvents) at the Southern Agricultural Research Center near Huntley during 1993 and 1994. Initial soil N levels (0-36 in. depth) were 15 and 22 lbs/a in 1993 and 1994. Field experiments were previously seeded to barley. A line-source sprinkler irrigation system was used to establish a water gradient in the field. Monida oats were planted in early April at 18 seeds per square foot. Stripped at right angles to the water gradient were six fertilizer N levels (0, 20, 40, 80, 120, 160 lbs N/a). The combined treatments produced a field site with a wide range of available water and N conditions.
Table 1. Predicted N requirements for oats with growing season water.
|Growing season water||Yield potential||Available N requirement||N:yield ratio|
As expected, available water increased oat yield potential and the response to N. Under high water stress, the response to N was small and yield potential was low, producing a comparatively flat curve. As water conditions improved, the response to N increased, producing a steeper curve that reached a higher plateau (Figure 1). Yield potential at the plateau levels, or where N was no longer limiting yields, were similar for the two growing seasons. However, oat yields without N fertilizer were higher in 1994 than 1993. This difference may have been a result of greater N mineralization from organic matter in 1994, resulting in less N deficiency where no fertilizer N was applied.
Maximum economic yield (MEY) was defined as the point along the yield-N curves (Figure 1) where increases in N no longer paid for themselves through higher yield (< 1 bushel increase in yield resulted from 4 lbs additional N), or where dollars returned from N was maximized. Maximum economic yields were generally within 2% of the theoretical maximum, hence they provide a good estimate of yield potential. The MEY-available water relationships (Figure 2) indicate that yield potential increased linearly with water in both 1993 and 1994. The relationships indicate that it takes approximately 4 to 5 in. of water to produce the first bushel of oat, and thereafter yield increases 12 to 14 bu/a with each inch of additional water.
Available N requirements (soil N + fertilizer N) for MEY increased linearly with water for both growing seasons. The slopes of the lines for the two seasons were similar and indicate that N requirements increased approximately 8 lbs N with each inch of additional water. However, the intercepts for the lines differ for the two seasons. As a result, it took approximately 35 to 40 lbs/a less N in 1994 to achieve MEY than in 1993 at similar water levels. Background soil N analysis levels for the two seasons were similar. However, barley residue from the preceding crop was burned prior to seeding the 1994 oat crop. This likely enhanced organic N mineralization and resulted in the lower calculated N requirement. Typically, most cereal growers do not burn their residue, hence under most situations the upper line in Figure 3 is probably the better predictor of fertilizer N needs. Using this approach, sufficient fertilizer N should be applied to achieve 60 lbs available N/a where 8 inches of available water (soil water + rainfall) is expected during the growing season. If water conditions improve, N application is increased approximately 8 lbs/a per inch increase in available water.
Edited by Jeff Jacobsen, Extension Soil Scientist

When I work on a theme unit like this I usually spent two weeks on the subject. I like for the children to have numerous opportunities to practice the skills in different ways. I feel that this give each child a strong foundation to build on.
Pocket Chart Story
Bulletin Board with Cows and Sheep
The children created the clouds and green hills by finger painting and roller painting.
Creative Art Sheep
The children first made marble paintings and then used those painting to create their sheep with.
Barn Yard Addition
Thursday and Friday Daily Plan Write Up
Don’t forget that all of these ideas can be found in the Down on the Farm Theme Packet on Teachers Pay Teachers and Teachers Notebook.

Types of literature
PRIMARY SOURCES are publications that report the results of original research. They may be in the form of conference papers, monographic series, technical reports, theses and dissertations, or journal articles. Because they present information in its original form (that is, it has not been interpreted or condensed or otherwise “repackaged” by other writers), these are considered primary sources. The works present new thinking/discoveries/results and unite them with the existing knowledge base. Journal articles that report original research are one of the more common and important steps in the information sharing cycle. They often go through a process in which they are “peer reviewed” by other experts who evaluate the work and findings before publication.
SECONDARY SOURCES are those which are published about the primary literature, that generalize, analyze, interpret, evaluate or otherwise “add value” to the original information, OR which simplify the process of finding and evaluating the primary literature. Some examples of secondary sources are “review” articles and indexes or bibliographies, such as PubMed or the ScienceDirect.
TERTIARY SOURCES compile or digest information from primary or secondary sources that has become widely accepted. They aim to provide a broad overview of a topic, or data, already proven facts, and definitions, often presented in a convenient form. They provide no new information. These include “reference” types of works such as textbooks, encyclopedias, fact books, guides and handbooks, and computer databases such as The Handbook of the Microbiological Media and SciFinder.
GRAY LITERATURE are source materials not available through the usual systems of publication (e.g., books or periodicals) and distribution. Gray literature includes conference proceedings, dissertations, technical reports, and working papers. Locating this type of literature is a little more difficult, but there are finding tools such as Dissertations Abstracts and PapersFirst.
What is a literature review?
A literature review discusses published information in a particular subject area, and sometimes information in a particular subject area within a certain time period.
A literature review can be just a simple summary of the sources, but it usually has an organizational pattern and combines both summary and synthesis. A summary is a recap of the important information of the source, but a synthesis is a re-organization, or a reshuffling, of that information. It might give a new interpretation of old material or combine new with old interpretations. Or it might trace the intellectual progression of the field, including major debates. And depending on the situation, the literature review may evaluate the sources and advise the reader on the most pertinent or relevant.
But how is a literature review different from an academic research paper?
While the main focus of an academic research paper is to support your own argument, the focus of a literature review is to summarize and synthesize the arguments and ideas of others. The academic research paper also covers a range of sources, but it is usually a select number of sources, because the emphasis is on the argument. Likewise, a literature review can also have an "argument," but it is not as important as covering a number of sources. In short, an academic research paper and a literature review contain some of the same elements. In fact, many academic research papers will contain a literature review section. But it is the aspect of the study (the argument or the sources) that is emphasized that determines what type of document it is.
Why do we write literature reviews?
Literature reviews provide you with a handy guide to a particular topic. If you have limited time to conduct research, literature reviews can give you an overview or act as a stepping stone. For professionals, they are useful reports that keep them up to date with what is current in the field. For scholars, the depth and breadth of the literature review emphasizes the credibility of the writer in his or her field. Literature reviews also provide a solid background for a research paper's investigation. Comprehensive knowledge of the literature of the field is essential to most research papers.
Who writes these things, anyway?
Literature reviews are written occasionally in the humanities, but mostly in the sciences and social sciences; in experiment and lab reports, they constitute a section of the paper. Sometimes a literature review is written as a paper in itself.
Excerpt from “Literature Reviews” from The Writing Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (http://writingcenter.unc.edu/resources/handouts-demos/specific-writing-assignments/literature-reviews), 2007.
Collection Development Librarian
1014 Boswell Ave.
Crete NE 68333

EducationALA's Great Web Sites for Kids
The American Library Association’s search engine of recommended sites for children. Includes grade level appropriateness and summaries of each website. California Preschools and Daycare Centers
Looking for a preschool or daycare for your child? This site lets you search preschools by city and includes address, phone number, tuition, hours of operation, and links to the school's Webpage.California Reading List (CRL)
This site provides reading lists that corresponds with the child’s reading level from grades K-12, based on their scores reflected in the California English-Language Arts Standards Test.Education.com
Advice, reference articles, and an online community for parents of preschool to high school students.Great Schools
Discusses California school-related issues and provides ratings and tips on how to evaluate a school.Helping Your Child with Homework
The U.S. Department of Education’s publication explaining the "hows" and "whys" of homework which includes helpful tips. Home Schooling Resources from the Librarian's Index to the Internet
Links to home schooling websites including California organizations. STAR Program Resources
Additional resources including the STAR scoring guide, sample subject and writing test questions and informative guides for parents and teachers. STAR Program Results
School, district, county and statewide summary results for Standardized Testing and Reporting (STAR) Program for the current year. Includes prior year CST, SAT/9, and CAT/6 results. STAR Test Questions
Gives a list of CST Released test questions and answers from 2003-2008, by subject and grade.
Created by moms, this site contains books reviews from a parent's perspective. Find "fiction that fits" your criteria for a good book. Recommended by the 2010 Association for Library Service to Children's Great Websites for Kids Committee.

Your Toddler 18 - 36 Months
- Your 18-24 month old: Your toddler learns new things every day! He or she may carry books around and pretend to read, recognize favorite books, and develop a routine with a caregiver that involves reading.
- By the age of 2, children have a constantly growing vocabulary of between 1,000 and 2,000 words. He or she may use words in simple combinations such as "all done" or "pick up."
- Your 24-36 month old: Your toddler will be speaking in sentences, and will ask and answer simple questions. He or she will imitate sounds, actions, and words in books, as well as label parts of illustrations. Your toddler will enjoy hearing his or her favorite stories read aloud repeatedly and will enjoy reading being a part of daily routines.
- By age 3, children often demonstrate obvious enjoyment of reading, and will label items in illustrations. Toddlers at this age may also begin creating scribbles that resemble printing.
Tips for reading with your toddler:
- Discuss the books that you read with your child. Ask who, what, where, when, why, and how questions.
- Your child will enjoy the chance to answer questions like "what is this animal?" or "what do you think will happen next?" Be sure to give your child enough time to answer questions before telling them the answer or moving on. Counting to ten silently in your head will help you to wait long enough for a response. This will show your child that you have respect for their developing thinking and speaking skills.
- Choose books that show characters doing things that your toddler does too (eating, playing, going to bed).
- Keep books on low shelves so that your toddler has easy access to them.
- Choose non-fiction books about colors, shapes, animals, families, etc.
- Teach your toddler how to handle books correctly and carefully.
- Share stories with repetitive text and encourage your child to repeat familiar parts along with you.
- Recite rhymes and sing songs during daily routines.
Books for Toddlers:
- Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See? by Bill Martin
- Chicka Chicka Boom Boom by Bill Martin Jr. and John Archambault
- Freight Train by Donald Crews
- From Head to Toe by Eric Carle
- Gingerbread Baby by Jan Brett
- My Car by Byron Barton
- Planes by Byron Barton
- The Little Red Hen by Bryon Barton
- The Very Hungry Caterpillar by Eric Carle
- We're Going on a Bear Hunt by Michael Rosen and Helen Oxenbury

World Water Day is on Monday, March 22nd, and it's a crucial moment in the fight against the global sanitation and water crisis that’s killing thousands of people every single day. No matter where you are in the world you can celebrate World Water Day! Check out some of the ways below:
The World’s Longest Toilet Queue is a mass mobilization event and Guinness World Record attempt bringing together thousands of campaigners from across the world to demand real change.
Ever seen water flow uphill? Without help of petrol or electricity? Meet the hydraulic ram, a robust and simple water-powered water pump. The ram pumps uses the power of water with a height difference flowing in the spring, stream or river to lift a fraction of the water up to 200 meters vertically, and sometimes pump it over a kilometre or two to where it is needed. No fuel or electricity required. The ram pump holds great potential for rural drinking water and irrigation water supply in hilly and mountainous areas, such as Afghanistan, Colombia, Nepal, and the Philippines.
Photo above: Children surrounding a hydraulic ram produced by AIDFI on the island Negros, the Philippines.
If you are in the Los Angeles area, come celebrate World Water Day with a Night of Generosity at SKYBAR on March 22nd at 8pm.
Water is big business. Just five beverage companies consume enough water over the course of a year to satisfy the daily water needs of every person on the planet. Of course, we may not be able to control how much water is put in a can of soda or a beer (less water, more alcohol, please) or the amount it takes to make paper, but we can control our own use at the workplace and even influence those who manage supplies.
It may not be our nickel that gets spent on the utility bill at work, but the gains are certainly ours when we reduce the corporate water footprint on the planet. Water prices are poised to rise due to increased water stress, and corporate growth is expected to be impeded as resources dwindle. Make no mistake, all of this comes out of our paychecks in one way or another.
At this very moment, millions of women are carrying 40 pounds of water on the return leg of their average 3.5-mile daily trek.
So today, on International Women's Day, I want to pay tribute to the resiliency of these women, and highlight the collective possibility they embody -- if freed from the back-breaking and time-consuming burden of collecting water.
Providing women with access to a nearby source of clean water frees up their days to earn an income or engage in other more productive activities – which can help significantly elevate their status in the community.
photo by Beth Harper via Creative Commons.
Outdoors is where we as residents tend to use huge amounts of water. In some parts of the country, mostly out in the arid West, 70 percent or more of residential water is used for lawn irrigation.
Something is seriously wrong with this picture. Pink flamingos and fountains aside, decorative lawns that need lots of care and lots of water are scourges. It may be that suburbia is making the wells run dry. Indeed, homeowners use an average of 120 gallons of water each day for things outside.
Think about that for a second: "things outside" -- where rain should be able to do the job nicely -- if we stick with the vegetation that grows naturally in our locale, that is. Irrigation, my dear water-freak neighbor, was invented to keep our fields of food alive, not your imported turf.
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon and former U.S. President Bill Clinton unveiled a new United Nations program to raise money to help fight HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and more. Through the program, called MASSIVEGOOD, travelers can donate a minimum of $2 on top of their airfare to support an international UN Health financing initiative by clicking on MASSIVEGOOD. Five clicks, the equivalent of $10, bought an insecticide-treated bed net, while 25 clicks was enough to pay for a year’s worth of HIV medication for one child.
Around the world, most boreholes are drilled with big, heavy equipment which arrives by truck, makes a lot of noise, and gets the job done in a short time, at a cost of about $5,000 to $20,000 per borehole. But there is a growing interest in doing it in a different way -- drilling by hand. It takes longer, it is heavy work, but it also gets the job done. Why are people getting interested? A hand-drilled borehole costs about $500 or less.
Läkarmissionen is one of our NGO partners in Sweden and is helping us to fight the global water crisis. Their operation began in 1958 to support a Swedish church related mission hospital in South Africa. That is what gave them the name Läkarmissionen - the Swedish Medical Mission Foundation.
Läkarmissionen’s intention is to make it possible for marginalized people to gain improved quality of life. Our experiences indicate that circumstances can be changed, and that sustainable results can be achieved, as we include the people in need in the process of change.

knowledge is from the heart as well as the mind. It is not a mere
mental perception of the forms of things or a knowledge of their
material nature; it must include the soul of things, the divine ideas
that they enshrine.
Everything is dependent on the small things: relaxation - you
always relax more; acceptance, oneself and others - can always try;
house-cleaning - will always be just as difficult, but at least you
have done it before. It is important to do all these little things
Question: - How can we discern
whether it is the divine conscience animating us and directing us in a
certain direction, or the
animal soul seeking release from seemingly unfavorable environments:
Answer: - The divine conscience acts in all struggles for betterment, but clouded more or less in each by reason of education and habit of thought; hence it varies in brightness. It is not possible to make a hard-and-fast fixed rule for finding out what is the animating motive. If we are trying to get into a better state, it is for us to decide if that be simply and wholly selfish. All actions are surrounded by desire as the rust is round the polished metal or the smoke round the fire, but we must try. So if we fix for ourselves the rule that we will try to do the best we can for others, we will generally be led right. If we rely on the higher self and aspire to be guided by it, we will be led to the right even if the road goes through pain, for sorrow and pain are necessary for purification of the soul. But if we wish to run away from an environment because we do not like it and without trying to live in it while not of it, we are not altering ourselves but simply altering the circumstances, and may not always gain anything.
Questioner: What is your attitude to the early teachings of Theosophy, the Blavatsky type? Do you consider we have deteriorated or advanced?
KRISHNAMURTI: I am afraid I do not know, because I do not know what Madame Blavatsky's teachings are. Why should I? Why should you know of someone else's teachings? You know, there is only one truth, and therefore there is only one way, which is not distant from the truth; there is only one method to that truth, because the means are not distinct from the end.
Now you who have studied Madame Blavatsky's and the latest Theosophy, or whatever it is, why do you want to be students of books instead of students of life? Why do you set up leaders and ask whose teachings are better? Don't you see? Please, I am not being harsh, or anything of that kind. Don't you see? You are Christians; find out what is true and false in Christianity—and you will then find out what is true. Find out what is true and false in your environment with all its oppressions and cruelties, and then you will find out what is true. Why do you want philosophies? Because life is an ugly thing, and you hope to run away from it through philosophy. Life is so empty, dull, stupid, ignominious, and you want something to bring romanticism into your world, some hope, some lingering, haunting feeling; whereas, if you really faced the world as it is, and tackled it, you would find it something much more, infinitely greater than any philosophy, greater than any book in the world, greater than any teaching or greater than any teacher.
We have really lost all sense of feeling, feeling for the oppressed, and feeling for the oppressor. You only feel when you are oppressed. So gradually we have intellectually explained away all our feelings, our sensitiveness, our delicate perceptions, until we are absolutely shallow; and to fill that shallowness, to enrich ourselves, we study books.
The Theosophical Society has had three objects for more than a century. They are:
Of these three objects the first has been considered the most important, at least since the time H.P. Blavatsky and H.S. Olcott arrived in India in 1879. Strangely enough the 'mission-statement' of the Theosophical Society in Wheaton (Adyar) rephrases the above, but leaves brotherhood out. It is as follows:
To encourage open-minded enquiry into world religions, philosophy, science, and the arts in order to understand the wisdom of the ages, respect the unity of all life, and help people explore spiritual self-transformation.
A mission statement is merely another word for aim or object. So one would expect the three objects of the Theosophical Society to agree precisely with the mission-statement. One would also expect the wording of the mission-statement to be more modern. In that vein it would have been a nice challenge if the board of directors of the US-section of the TS had found a new sex-neutral way of saying that people should treat each other well. What else does a 'nucleus of the Universal Brotherhood of Humanity (etc)' mean? But to leave it all out is really going too far for me, and for several of the people I met in Wheaton this summer. This mission-statement sounds selfish to me. Great: I find an organisation where people will help me with my self-transformation en where my open enquiry into religions, spirituality and science will be supported. Wonderful. And there is no suggestion that I personally need to do anything at all. I don't need to practice loving kindness. I don't need to find tolerance in my heart for those I've learned to despise or ignore. I will perhaps learn to respect the unity of all life in abstract, but there is no need for me to do anything practical at all...
I'm obviously being cynical. In actual fact the attempt to form a nucleus of the Universal Brotherhood of Humanity, without distinction of race, creed, sex, caste or color is work. It means a constant attempt to overcome my conditioning. It means reaching out to people. It means practicing kindness. It means learning to deal with people I may not like. I find it very disappointing that the TS in America has edited this very important attempt out of its 'mission statement' and hope they will change things soon.
Each summer the American Section of the Theosophical Society (TS) has a gathering that is both business meeting and summer school. Non-members of the TS are not explicitly invited, but in practice nothing is done to discourage them from coming either. The atmosphere of the gathering was both very familiar to me, as strange and new. Familiar, as it was as comfortable talking to these overseas theosophists, as it has always been talking to theosophists here in the Netherlands. Strange as well, as inevitably things are done differently, when there is a different host-country.
The opening was a lot former than I'm used to seeing it. 'evening dress optional' says it all, I think. For those who have not been to Olcott for this: evening dress means suits and ties and dresses and in the case of theosophists: saris and Indian dresses in general. First Betty Bland, the national president of the TS in the USA, welcomed us. Then there were prayers from 'all the world's religions', though this is obviously practically impossible there were a lot. The atmosphere of that ceremony was more informal than I saw it in India. It looked like people could just come up and give whatever prayer they wanted. Among the many prayers more than one Christian denomination was represented, as well as Islam, the gayatri mantra and a humanist prayer. The opening ended with greetings from all over the world. I gave greetings from the Netherlands and the International Theosophical Centre at Naarden also in the Netherlands.
The business meeting consisted of reports from the various departments. I was surprised to see the work that went into making it literally entertaining. The Quest Bookshop even got a (fake) sťance on the way in which Annie Besant appeared. This is certainly different from how I'm used to seeing it, but I enjoyed myself anyhow.
The theme of the school was 'Theosophy in action'. Radha Burnier, international president, gave most of the lectures. Room had been made for Diana Chapotin's coverage of the Order of Service, John Algeo and Joy Mills. After the main lecture, each morning, there were group discussion that were - as usual - very interesting. In the afternoon there were usually lectures, workshops and meditation classes. To be honest I wasn't impressed with what I saw of the meditation classes. Theosophists don't have a reputation of being very good at meditation and this didn't help any in my book. The morning meditation even reminded me of group hypnosis. A bad sign that confirmed this impression was that several people told me that they had a tendency to fall asleep during the morning-meditation.
The lectures were very good. Radha Burnier's opening lecture was about finding balance. She meant finding a balance between the development of buddhi (roughly intuition), thought, emotion and action. If there is insight, don't act on it immediately. Let it germinate, it will express itself naturally in action or words at some point. Spiritual aspiration as well needs to be in harmony. Too much of it leads to ambition, too much tension or waste of energy. Mental balance includes overcoming the duality of thought. This means that likes and dislikes will disappear and we will neither accept nor reject what IS.
Diana Chapotin, in her lecture about the Theosophical Order of Service (TOS), stressed that theosophists are active in social service in various ways. One of the main ways is individual action. She meant that theosophists all over the world are active in social work through organisations that have nothing to do with theosophy. The second way in which theosophists are active practically in the world is through the activities of local theosophical lodges and sections. The TOS complements all that with very specific projects in area's like education, animal welfare, vegetarianism and help in case of natural disasters like recently Katrina. On an organisational level TOS-groups are led by theosophists, but the volunteers don't have to be members. Though any kind of social work can be taken on, it is necessary that central theosophical values behind the work are communicated regularly to keep the work theosophical. Diana explained that the work of the TOS has grown dramatically recently under her leadership. She can't cope on her own anymore and a reorganisation is necessary.
Joy Mills gave a public lecture on the vitality of living truth. She stressed the difference between living wisdom and book wisdom. Theosophists always risk not going beyond book wisdom. If we really see the truth, our heart and our whole being will change. That's the power of living truth. In order for that to happen, we need to actually practice truth as we know it (not as we want it to be) in our daily lives. Every experience that broadens our sensitivity, mirrors living truth for us. In modern thought the interconnectedness of everything is becoming quite clear. H.P. Blavatsky actually went one step further: she saw everything as one living being, One Life. The theory of Gaia shows this on the level of the earth, but for Blavatsky it's true of the whole universe. Breath is used as an image of that Oneness.
Radha's second lecture dealt with a very central theme: growing in wisdom. In this lecture she repeated a theme that threads through her Watchtower pieces in The Theosophist as well: Humanity grows in knowledge, but not in wisdom. The knowledge that has been developed over the past two centuries leads to destruction because there is no knowledge on what is right in the long run. It is relatively easy to develop knowledge. It is very hard to find out what right action is. We don't realise enough that in hurting someone else, we hurt ourselves. Wisdom leads to a peaceful, sensitive world. Knowledge leads to pride and this can only be challenged by becoming aware of the limitations of knowledge. Otherwise knowledge leads to a feeling of separateness. On the other hand it is necessary to learn to think independently and become aware to what extent we are all influenced by others. An example she gave is that the simple life is no longer seen as ideal. Everybody wants to live as is portrayed on television. In all her lectures this week Radha reminded us that our personal problems need to come second. Growth in wisdom means growth in altruism and that means forgetting self. Our personal problems and our joys are both temporary. We make them bigger than they are. Why is suffering such a large problem? The TS was founded to fight prejudice. Prejudice hinders an insight into real problems and can only be dissolved by a feeling of connectedness with all human beings. Our altruism needs to become universal. The Buddha said: it's better to give a little lovingly, than to give a lot without love.
It was very impressive to hear the report of theosophists living near the area where Katrina hit. There were slides as accompanying there very personal report. The most important insight I got from that was that storms are normal for the people in this region. Normally people do not leave in case of a storm. Despite that fact, and this has not been stressed enough, this was the most successful evacuation in history. Around 90-95% of the people in the New Orleans region were evacuated. We were told that criminals always stay behind so they can loot. This is part of the pattern. Because this storm did so much more damage than most other storms, everything got bigger than usual.
John Algeo spoke about the most holy mission of theosophy. He started by saying that Blavatsky in her final five years on earth, had left a legacy of five:
These three letters were the backbone to Johns two lectures. They give direction to Theosophical work in the world. Blavatsky's last years were tough, but John stressed that out of disaster, blessings often come. Disasters mix things up. Tibetan Buddhism would never have spread to the West as it has, if China hadn't invaded Tibet. In her 1891 letter, Blavatsky mainly spoke of living theosophy, not the teachings. In her first letter she stressed the aim of the Theosophical Society to unite people of all nations and altruism. Organisations are important, but they can't created holiness, health or wholeness. We have to become fully human, that is what the word master signifies: to master ourselves. There can only be harmony in organisations, if opposites are balanced, not through wiping out differences. In his second lecture he returned to the theme of unifying people of all nations. He also pointed out that every wise administration knows that things can't be forced. No rule can open the heart-mind of people. No group is safe from fundamentalism. Theosophists too run this risk, though in real theosophy there can be no dogmas, because it is based on real insight and rational thinking. Real theosophy reflects divine reason, the reason of Buddhi. John closed with Blavatsky's words in the last letter to the American Conventions: to be theosophists, live theosophy.
In her next lecture Radha talked about growing in Love. Love is our true being, that aspect of ourselves which is one with every other. Love is beyond words, it's part of Universal Life. It is necessary to feel affection for kids and animals. Continually looking for security, that wish masks a desire for Love. Our world is dark, there is little friendship, little Love. How do we remove the barriers that separate us from our essential nature: Love? To this practical question, Radha's answer is to be more sensitive. We have to feel as others feel, without identifying with their pain. You can't help others by going along with their pain, but you have to know what it is. Right action requires going beyond social custom and convention and being really sensitive. This sensitivity doesn't hinder our happiness. Our real nature isn't just Love, it's also Bliss. But we need to become conscious of other people. Unkind thoughts hurt others, and ultimately ourselves. They are like a hungry wolf that eats up our best tendencies. Annie Besant said that if we can't see God in others, we must be the worst possible atheists. The problem with gossip is that it is superficial. We have to learn to look under the surface, without judgment of any kind. The habit to criticize strengthens the ego. Be a missionary of Love and generosity. Be prepared to give of yourself. Don't just do what is necessary, but actively contribute to the welfare of people in conversation. Every tendency of personality has to disappear. That way of looking teaches us to overcome pettiness. The first step is the last step, because the direction in which we move is of primary importance.
Radha's final lecture was called 'purification through action'. Real wisdom is in seeing action in non-action and non-action in action. The central question she asked: what is right action? Each of us has to decide that for ourselves. Keep in mind that our energy impacts the world, not just our actions. Everything is interconnected. That's why abstaining from action isn't the same thing as freedom from action. When actions create problems, it's not right action. Right action is necessary, but we have to avoid identifying with it. In everything you do, ask yourself if there is egoism involved. The tricky part is that even that thought is in a way selfish. We need an inner balance that is independent of success or failure. Success and failure are part of the ups and downs of life, but we don't have to inwardly get involved in that. The risk of accomplishment is that one starts thinking: I can do this. That feeling can get in the way of right action. The problem with selfish action is that even if the short-term result seems good, it's never permanent. Radha closed with one of Krishnamurti's insights: actions that are a product of the past, don't work. Action only works if it's the consequence of right insight. This lecture was very insightful, but I missed one aspect that the title does suggest: that sometimes insight follows unselfish action. Right action can help clean the personality. One has to start somewhere.
The final session was a question and answer round with Radha Burnier, Joy Mills and John Algeo. The questions had come in through the internet and from the discussion groups. What follows is a selection. Can Muslims become members of the Theosophical Society? Yes, we have Muslim members in Indonesia, India and Pakistan. Radha stressed that Muslim women aren't forced to stay at home in all countries. In many countries they are free. Why do people ignore the Middle Path? The middle path is hard, said Radha, people prefer it easy. It's hard to overcome the tendency to overdo things. A question was asked about loving yourself. Joy Mills answered that it is important to look at yourself objectively. Observe yourself, it is unnecessary to become emotional or judgmental about yourself. Loving yourself means accepting what is, and resolving to change. Radha asks what it means to love yourself. Can you love your shadow? Reality IS, it doesn't need to be loved.
As this summary shows, the lectures were very interesting and deep. I really enjoyed myself and met some very good people.

Under a cooperative agreement with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Maryland State Department of Education receives funding to build the capacity of local school systems to deliver HIV/AIDS Prevention Education Programs. Funded program activities include strengthening coordinated school health programs at the local school system level to deliver training in HIV/AIDS prevention and developing policy and procedures.
The CDC has identified promising and research based practices in HIV/AIDS prevention education. For more information and a list of the identified programs to be delivered within a coordinated school health model visit the CDC website.
For a summary of Maryland laws and regulations relating to Health Education, HIV/AIDS and Teen Pregnancy Prevention education visit nasbe survey.pdf
The 2004 School Health Education Profile (SHEP) assesses the status of HIV prevention efforts within high schools health education curriculum in Maryland schools. Maryland results are linked below:
Principal Results in pdf format mdPrincipal04a.pdf
Principal Results in PowerPoint MDPrincipal04a.ppt
Teacher Results in pdf format mdTeacher04a.pdf
Teacher Results in

Math is all about problem solving. One of the best ways to help children learn math is to present them with a problem in which they have to devise their own strategies to find the solution(s). There is usually more than 1 way to solve math problems and children need the opportunity to discover shortcuts and their own algorithms to determine the appropriate solution, they should also justify their solution(s).
The following math word problems are specific for children in the sixth grade and are divided into the main math cagegories: Number Concepts, Patterns and Algebra, Geometry and Measurement, Data Management and Probability. Children should be involved in problem solving activities every day. Problems for second grade students should be read to them. Students should also be able to describe why their solutions work or how they know it's the right solution. My favorite question to children is 'how do you know'. When they have to explain how they arrived at their answer, you immediately know the learning that has taken place.
Patterns and Algebra
Kelly's classroom organized an e-Pal club. 11 people joined the club. Each of of them sent an email to each of the members of the club. How many emails were actually sent? How do you know? Ticket sales for the bake sale were underway. Four people bought tickets on the first day of sales, twice as many people bought tickets on the second day and each day afterwards twice as many people bought tickets. How many tickets were sold after 16 days?
Data Management and Probability
Pet Parade: Mr. James has 14 cats, dogs and guinea pigs. What are all the combinations he could have?
How many different types of pizza can you make with the following toppings: pepperoni, tomatoes, bacon, onions and green peppers? Show your answer.
Sam bought 8 ball caps, one for each of her eight friends, for $8.95 each. The cashier charged her an additional $12.07 in sales tax. She left the store with a measely $6.28. How much money did Sam start with?
Geometry and Measurement.
Watch your favorite television show from beginning to end. Time each of the commercials and determine the percentage of commercial time for the entire show. Now determine the percentage of time the actual show is. What is the fraction of commercials?
Two squares are beside each other. One square has 6 times the lenght of the other square, how many times greater is the area of the larger square? How do you know?

Playing with Equations to Solve Problems
Date: 09/16/2003 at 10:48:13 From: Mara Subject: To state the geometric property of an equation I need to give the geometric property common to all lines in the family x - ky = 1 I know that the answer is that all lines in this family have an x-intercept at x=1 but I am totally clueless about showing why this is the case. At first I thought that using the double-intercept equation (x/a) + (y/b) = 1 would work but I couldn't get it in the correct form. Then I tried to solve for x and y and got x = 1 + ky and y = (-1/k) + (-x/k) but now I do not know what to do with this. So I was wondering if you knew how to go about solving this?
Date: 09/16/2003 at 12:28:52 From: Doctor Peterson Subject: Re: To state the geometric property of an equation Hi, Mara. I don't think there is any method you can use to solve this sort of problem without a lot of thinking and testing. Let's see how I personally would approach it (as well as I can construct it, considering that I know the answer already!). Then I'll look at some alternative approaches you might take. We have x - ky = 1 and we want to know what property all these lines have in common. Probably, since this is an open-ended question and I don't expect it to be straightforward, I would start by just "playing" with the equation, getting a feel for how it works by trying a few special cases. I might take k = 0, 1, and -1 and graph those three lines, x = 1 x - y = 1 x + y = 1 I would find that they all intersect at (1,0), and my answer would be that all the lines seem to contain that point. (In a sense this is a more purely "geometric" property than the x-intercept, since it does not refer to the coordinates.) Then I would want to prove that this is true for ALL k, to make sure I hadn't fooled myself by choosing three cases that happened to intersect. Thinking of this as a point shared by all lines in the family, I would prove it by simply substituting x=1, y=0 in the general equation: x - ky = 1 1 - k*0 = 1 is true for all k so (1,0) is indeed on all the lines, not just the three I tried. Or, I might think of it as a common x-intercept, as you said; then I would do what you suggested and put the equation into two-intercept form x/a + y/b = 1 That's easy; all it takes is to interpret -ky as y divided by -1/k: x/1 + y/(-1/k) = 1 So the x-intercept is 1 for all these lines, and the y-intercept is -1/k. So my approach is to experiment (the more adult word for "play"!) and make a conjecture (the more adult word for "guess"), and then prove that conjecture. Now, is there any other way you might approach this? If you were really smart (and I might possibly have done this if I were faced with the equation afresh), you could just see that the equation looks like the two-intercept form, and gone directly to the proof. If you could do that, fine; but you can't depend on such insight! You might instead just go through each form of the equation, starting probably with slope-intercept, and see whether any important feature (such as the slope or y-intercept) is constant. When that failed, it would be hard to move on to the point-slope or two-point form, because you would have to choose the point(s), and there is no obvious basis for that choice. So you would probably next try the two- intercept form (which many studuents never see, so you're lucky). Your approach came close. When you solved for x, you just had to look and see that the x-intercept (the constant in that form) is always 1. But since that form, the slope-x-intercept form, is little-known, it's not surprising that you did not know what to do with it. But I really think that my approach is the most reasonable hope to find the answer quickly. If you have any further questions, feel free to write back. - Doctor Peterson, The Math Forum http://mathforum.org/dr.math/
Search the Dr. Math Library:
Ask Dr. MathTM
© 1994-2013 The Math Forum

Problem: An oil drilling rig located 14 miles off of a straight coastline is to be connected by a pipeline to a renery 10 miles down the coast from the point directly opposite the drilling rig. Laying pipe under water costs 500,000 dollars per mile. Laying pipe on land costs 300,000 dollars per mile. What combination of underwater and land-based pipe will minimize the total cost of the pipeline?
For now I'd just like help drawing the picture because in my eyes this is very poorly written. So can someone help me out with a picture for this?

The Physics Help Forum not working today, at least not from my ISP, so this goes here. It's basically a math deal anyway:
The formula to calculate the force of a point of mass, let's call them planets, that results from its being gravitationally attracted by another point of mass is Newton's:
Where is the force of the planet that results from the gravitational attraction exerted upon it by the other planet, is Newton's gravity constant, and are the respecive masses of the planets, and d is the distance between them.
For simplicity's sake let's say all the planets considered are of the same mass, so we can write instead of .
Now, if I'm not mistaken, the formula for calculating the force of a planet resulting from the gravitational attraction of more than two planets is:
Where is the force on the jth planet resulting from the gravitational attraction of the other planets, and is the distance between the jth planet and the kth planet.
My question is "where is the vector addition?" That is, when considering the force on one planet that results from the gravitational attraction of many other planets, we have to take into account not only the distance of the other planets from planet j but also their position with respect to it (right?).
Take for example the simple case of three planets in the same plane. Planet j is at the origin. Planet k is one unit to the right of j on the x axis, while planet l is one unit up the y axis. If the masses all equal 1, then, by the formula above, the force on planet j would be:
But is a function of both the distance and the position, right? So we must consider not only the Gravitational Forces individually exerted upon j by k and l, but also the angle at which these forces are exerted. That is, we must add the vectors. To add vectors you just plug in the x value and y value sums of the added vectors into pythagoras' formula. The force on planet j should therefore be:
(Where is the angle subtended by a line drawn from planet j to planet x. I.e. and )
So, what am I missing here? I am fully aware that I, and not Newton, am missing something here. Someone please help point this out for me.

The doping-drug Epo has an impact in the brain
Sportsmen and women dope with the blood hormone Epo to enhance their performance. Researchers from the University of Zurich now discovered by animal testing that Epo has a performance-enhancing effect in the brain shortly after injection and not only after days by improving oxygen transport in blood. As Epo also increases motivation, it could be useful in treating depression.
The well-known blood hormone Epo is not only used for medicinal purposes; some athletes misuse it for doping. It boosts the number of red blood cells, thereby increasing the transport of oxygen to the muscles. This leads to improvements in performance, which can especially give endurance athletes such as cyclists or marathon runners the edge.
Epo has immediate impact on exercise performance
In a recently published study, Max Gassmann, a veterinary physiologist from the University of Zurich, proved that Epo also drastically increases motivation in the brain as soon as it has been injected, without the number of red blood cells increasing.
Gassmann's team tested exercise performance of differently treated mice, studying genetically modified mice that produce human Epo solely in the brain and mice that the researchers had injected with Epo and the hormone reached the brain thus by blood. Both mouse groups exhibited an increased performance on the treadmill compared to the untreated control animals. "We assume that Epo in the brain triggers a motivation boost to increase physical performance," explains Professor Gassmann. He and his team are now testing the performance-enhancing effect of Epo on volunteers.
Epo probably has an impact on people's moods, too. It might thus be used in patients who suffer from depression. The latest experiments conducted by a German-Danish research group reveal that Epo can also alleviate the condition of patients suffering from schizophrenia by improving their mental performance.
Provided by University of Zurich
- Biker's warning! Erythropoietin hits blood vessels to raise blood pressure in the brain Dec 10, 2011 | not rated yet | 0
- A new way to boost red blood cell numbers Jan 10, 2008 | not rated yet | 0
- New discovery leaves blood-doping athletes scratching their heads Sep 20, 2007 | not rated yet | 0
- Memory enhanced by sports-cheat drug Sep 09, 2008 | not rated yet | 0
- EPO doping helps combat cerebral malaria Apr 21, 2011 | not rated yet | 0
- Motion perception revisited: High Phi effect challenges established motion perception assumptions Apr 23, 2013 | 3 / 5 (2) | 2
- Anything you can do I can do better: Neuromolecular foundations of the superiority illusion (Update) Apr 02, 2013 | 4.5 / 5 (11) | 5
- The visual system as economist: Neural resource allocation in visual adaptation Mar 30, 2013 | 5 / 5 (2) | 9
- Separate lives: Neuronal and organismal lifespans decoupled Mar 27, 2013 | 4.9 / 5 (8) | 0
- Sizing things up: The evolutionary neurobiology of scale invariance Feb 28, 2013 | 4.8 / 5 (10) | 14
Pressure-volume curve: Elastic Recoil Pressure don't make sense
May 18, 2013 From pressure-volume curve of the lung and chest wall (attached photo), I don't understand why would the elastic recoil pressure of the lung is...
If you became brain-dead, would you want them to pull the plug?
May 17, 2013 I'd want the rest of me to stay alive. Sure it's a lousy way to live but it beats being all-the-way dead. Maybe if I make it 20 years they'll...
MRI bill question
May 15, 2013 Dear PFers, The hospital gave us a $12k bill for one MRI (head with contrast). The people I talked to at the hospital tell me that they do not...
Ratio of Hydrogen of Oxygen in Dessicated Animal Protein
May 13, 2013 As an experiment, for the past few months I've been consuming at least one portion of Jell-O or unflavored Knox gelatin per day. I'm 64, in very...
Alcohol and acetaminophen
May 13, 2013 Edit: sorry for the typo in the title , can't edit I looked around on google quite a bit and it's very hard to find precise information on the...
Marie Curie's leukemia
May 13, 2013 Does anyone know what might be the cause of Marie Curie's cancer
- More from Physics Forums - Medical Sciences
More news stories
A new report suggests that improved health care and significant reductions in drug costs might be attained by breaking up the age-old relationship between physicians and drug company representatives who promote the newest, ...
Medications 17 hours ago | 5 / 5 (1) | 0
Federal health regulators say an experimental insomnia drug from Merck can help patients fall asleep, but it also carries worrisome side effects, including daytime drowsiness and suicidal thinking.
Medications 19 hours ago | not rated yet | 0
(AP)—Former Navy Secretary Richard J. Danzig, who has served as a bio-warfare adviser to the president, the Pentagon, and the Department of Homeland Security, urged the government to stockpile an anti-anthrax drug while ...
Medications May 20, 2013 | 5 / 5 (1) | 0
Europe's medicines watchdog said Friday the benefits of acne drug Diane-35, also widely used as a contraceptive, outweigh the risk of developing blood clots in the veins—when correctly prescribed.
Medications May 17, 2013 | not rated yet | 0
Singapore's Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) and Switzerland's Cytos Biotechnology AG today announced that the first healthy volunteer has been dosed in a Phase 1 clinical trial with their ...
Medications May 17, 2013 | 5 / 5 (1) | 1
Each day, an average of nine people are killed in the United States and more than 1,000 injured by drivers doing something other than driving.
7 minutes ago | not rated yet | 0
(Medical Xpress)—We spend about a third of our life asleep, but why we need to do so remains a mystery. In a recent publication, researchers at University of Surrey and University College London suggest a new hypothesis, ...
2 minutes ago | not rated yet | 0
Johns Hopkins researchers say they have discovered specific chemical alterations in two genes that, when present during pregnancy, reliably predict whether a woman will develop postpartum depression.
2 hours ago | not rated yet | 0 |
A Nobel prize-winning scientist Tuesday played down "shock-horror scenarios" that a new virus strain will emerge with the potential to kill millions of people.
1 hour ago | 5 / 5 (1) | 0
(Medical Xpress)—A three-year multinational study has tracked and detailed the progression of Huntington's disease (HD), predicting clinical decline in people carrying the HD gene more than 10 years before ...
29 minutes ago | not rated yet | 0
Children who have suffered maltreatment are 36% more likely to be obese in adulthood compared to non-maltreated children, according to a new study by King's College London. The authors estimate that the prevention or effective ...
2 hours ago | not rated yet | 0

Cancer debate: Are tumors fueled by stem cells?
How can a cancer come back after it's apparently been eradicated? Three new studies from American, Belgian, British and Dutch researchers are bolstering a long-debated idea: that tumors contain their own pool of stem cells that can multiply and keep fueling the cancer, seeding regrowth.
If that's true, scientists will need to find a way to kill those cells, apart from how they attack the rest of the tumor.
Stem cells in healthy tissues are known for their ability to produce any kind of cell. The new research deals with a different kind, cancer stem cells. Some researchers, but not all, believe they lurk as a persisting feature in tumors.
Over the past decade, studies have found evidence for them in tumors like breast and colon cancers. But this research has largely depended on transplanting human cancer cells into mice that don't have immune systems, an artificial environment that raises questions about the relevance of the results.
Now, three studies reported online Wednesday in the journals Nature and Science present evidence for cancer stem cells within the original tumors. Again, the research relies on mice. That and other factors mean the new findings still won't convince everyone that cancer stem cells are key to finding more powerful treatments.
But researcher Luis Parada, of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, believes his team is onto something. He says that for the type of brain tumor his team studied, "we've identified the true enemy."
If his finding applies to other cancers, he said, then even if chemotherapy drastically shrinks a tumor but doesn't affect its supply of cancer stem cells, "very little progress has actually been made."
The three studies used labeling techniques to trace the ancestry of cells within mouse tumors.
Collectively, they give "very strong support" to the cancer stem cell theory, said Jeffrey M. Rosen, a professor of molecular and cellular biology at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. He did not participate in the work but supports the theory, which he said is widely accepted.
Parada's team worked with mice genetically primed to develop a certain type of brain tumor. The scientists genetically labeled particular cells in the tumor and then attacked the cancer with the same drug given to human patients. It kills growing tumor cells and temporarily stops the cancer's growth.
After treatment, when the tumor started growing again in the mice, the researchers showed that the vast majority, if not all, of its new cells had descended from the labeled cells. Apparently these were the tumor's cancer stem cells, they concluded.
Parada said his team is now trying to isolate cancer stem cells from mouse brain cancers to study them and perhaps get some leads for developing therapies to eradicate them.
He also said that preliminary study of human brain tumors is producing results consistent with what his team found in the mice.
Parada's study appears in Nature. In a second Nature report, British and Belgian researchers found evidence for cancer stem cells in early stage skin tumors in mice. And in the journal Science, a Dutch group found such evidence in mouse intestinal polyps, which are precursors to colon cancer.
Scott Kern of the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore is skeptical about whether tumors contain cancer stem cells. He said that since the new studies didn't involve human tumors, it's not clear how relevant they are to people.
The two European studies focused largely on lesions that can lead to tumors, he said. And as for Parada's brain cancer study, he said he believed the results could be explained without relying on the cancer stem cell theory.
Copyright 2012 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
- Study suggests new treatment target for glioblastoma multiforme Aug 01, 2012 | not rated yet | 0
- Cancer stem cell vaccine in development shows antitumor effect Apr 02, 2012 | not rated yet | 0
- Herceptin targets breast cancer stem cells Jul 09, 2008 | not rated yet | 0
- New role for Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor in regulating skin cancer stem cells Oct 19, 2011 | not rated yet | 0
- Stem cells, potential source of cancer-fighting T cells Sep 20, 2011 | not rated yet | 0
- Motion perception revisited: High Phi effect challenges established motion perception assumptions Apr 23, 2013 | 3 / 5 (2) | 2
- Anything you can do I can do better: Neuromolecular foundations of the superiority illusion (Update) Apr 02, 2013 | 4.5 / 5 (11) | 5
- The visual system as economist: Neural resource allocation in visual adaptation Mar 30, 2013 | 5 / 5 (2) | 9
- Separate lives: Neuronal and organismal lifespans decoupled Mar 27, 2013 | 4.9 / 5 (8) | 0
- Sizing things up: The evolutionary neurobiology of scale invariance Feb 28, 2013 | 4.8 / 5 (10) | 14
Pressure-volume curve: Elastic Recoil Pressure don't make sense
May 18, 2013 From pressure-volume curve of the lung and chest wall (attached photo), I don't understand why would the elastic recoil pressure of the lung is...
If you became brain-dead, would you want them to pull the plug?
May 17, 2013 I'd want the rest of me to stay alive. Sure it's a lousy way to live but it beats being all-the-way dead. Maybe if I make it 20 years they'll...
MRI bill question
May 15, 2013 Dear PFers, The hospital gave us a $12k bill for one MRI (head with contrast). The people I talked to at the hospital tell me that they do not...
Ratio of Hydrogen of Oxygen in Dessicated Animal Protein
May 13, 2013 As an experiment, for the past few months I've been consuming at least one portion of Jell-O or unflavored Knox gelatin per day. I'm 64, in very...
Alcohol and acetaminophen
May 13, 2013 Edit: sorry for the typo in the title , can't edit I looked around on google quite a bit and it's very hard to find precise information on the...
Marie Curie's leukemia
May 13, 2013 Does anyone know what might be the cause of Marie Curie's cancer
- More from Physics Forums - Medical Sciences
More news stories
Older prostate cancer patients with other underlying health conditions should think twice before committing to surgery or radiation therapy for their cancer, according to a multicenter study led by researchers in the UCLA ...
Cancer 11 hours ago | not rated yet | 0 |
Intensity-modulated radiation therapy has become the most commonly used type of radiation in prostate cancer, but research from the University of North Carolina suggests that the therapy may not be more effective than older, ...
Cancer 13 hours ago | not rated yet | 0
New research suggests that a compound abundant in the Mediterranean diet takes away cancer cells' "superpower" to escape death. By altering a very specific step in gene regulation, this compound essentially re-educates cancer ...
Cancer 14 hours ago | 4.8 / 5 (12) | 2 |
(HealthDay)—For young adults needing either a chest or abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT), the short-term risk of death from underlying morbidity is greater than the long-term risk of radiation-induced ...
Cancer 15 hours ago | not rated yet | 0
In a new study described in the journal Oncogene, researchers reveal how a key player in cell growth, immunity and the inflammatory response can be transformed into a primary contributor to tumor growth.
Cancer 20 hours ago | not rated yet | 0 |
A Nobel prize-winning scientist Tuesday played down "shock-horror scenarios" that a new virus strain will emerge with the potential to kill millions of people.
42 minutes ago | 5 / 5 (1) | 0
No new human cases of the H7N9 virus have been recorded in China for a week, national health authorities said, for the first time since the outbreak began in March.
24 minutes ago | not rated yet | 0
Johns Hopkins researchers say they have discovered specific chemical alterations in two genes that, when present during pregnancy, reliably predict whether a woman will develop postpartum depression.
1 hour ago | not rated yet | 0 |
(Medical Xpress)—A research team, led by Jeremy Barr, a biology post-doctoral fellow, unveils a new immune system that protects humans and animals from infection.
11 hours ago | 4.6 / 5 (13) | 5 |
Children who have suffered maltreatment are 36% more likely to be obese in adulthood compared to non-maltreated children, according to a new study by King's College London. The authors estimate that the prevention or effective ...
1 hour ago | not rated yet | 0
Early-life exposure to traffic-related air pollution was significantly associated with higher hyperactivity scores at age 7, according to new research from the University of Cincinnati (UC) and Cincinnati Children's Hospital ...
5 hours ago | not rated yet | 0 |

Research finds novel airborne germ-killing oral spray effective in fighting colds and flu
University Hospitals Case Medical Center clinical researchers will present findings about a one-two punch to prevent colds and flu in San Francisco at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (ICAAC) on September 9, 2012.
The research team is presenting data in two poster presentations that a new oral antiseptic spray is effective in killing 99.9 percent of infectious airborne germs. Findings from these two presentations led to the development of Halo Oral Antiseptic, a first-of-its kind germ-fighting spray which is currently on store shelves.
"Respiratory tract disease is a major cause of morbidity and mortality throughout the world," says Frank Esper, MD, infectious disease expert at UH Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital and lead author of one of the studies. "Yet there has been limited progress in the prevention of respiratory virus infections. Halo is unique in that it offers protection from airborne germs such as influenza and rhinovirus."
Dr. Esper and a team of researchers used glycerine and xanthan gum as a microbial barrier combined with cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC) as a broad-spectrum anti-infective agent to fight respiratory illnesses. To test this, clinical strains of 2009 pandemic H1N1 were used as a prototype virus to demonstrate Halo's anti-infective activity in cell culture assays. "The glycerine and xanthan gum prevent the germs from entering a person's system and the CPC kills the germs once they're trapped there," explains Dr. Esper, who is also Associate Professor at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine.
Dr. Esper will present his findings that Halo will have clear benefit to aid against infection and reduce disease from epidemic, sporadic or pandemic respiratory viral infections, particularly helping people at risk for severe respiratory illness including immune-compromised individuals with chronic lung disease, and military personnel.
Another study on Halo will be presented by Mahmoud Ghannoum, PhD, of UH Case Medical Center, showing Halo's effectiveness against disease-causing pathogenic germs. The presentation asserts that respiratory and/or systemic infections through airborne and manually transmitted pathogenic microbes often enter the system through the mouth, making Halo, an oral spray that targets these pathogens, an effective way to prevent infections. Additionally, preliminary data from the researchers found that Halo completely kills all 11 clinical strains of whooping cough (Bordetella pertussis) against which the spray was tested.
The results showed that when a person used three sprays of Halo, it destroyed airborne germs breathed in for up to six hours, even when people were eating and drinking. The concept of coating the back of the oral cavity to prevent germs from entering and then providing sustained antiseptic action to kill airborne germs was developed by a Cleveland company, Oasis Consumer Healthcare.
"Exposure to airborne germs is inevitable – especially in crowded environments and when traveling," said Dr. Ghannoum, who is also the Director of the Center for Medical Mycology at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine. "Unlike other products that support the immune system or protect from germs on surfaces or hands, Halo is the first and only product of its kind to offer protection from airborne germs."
Provided by University Hospitals Case Medical Center
- New study finds resistant organisms at core of soft contact lens corneal infections Jan 28, 2008 | not rated yet | 0
- Give dirty mouths a brush Apr 13, 2010 | not rated yet | 0
- Sharing musical instruments means sharing germs May 12, 2011 | not rated yet | 0
- New AIDS-like disease in Asians, not contagious Aug 22, 2012 | not rated yet | 0
- Bus, tram passengers warned to keep germs to themselves Jan 18, 2011 | not rated yet | 0
- Motion perception revisited: High Phi effect challenges established motion perception assumptions Apr 23, 2013 | 3 / 5 (2) | 2
- Anything you can do I can do better: Neuromolecular foundations of the superiority illusion (Update) Apr 02, 2013 | 4.5 / 5 (11) | 5
- The visual system as economist: Neural resource allocation in visual adaptation Mar 30, 2013 | 5 / 5 (2) | 9
- Separate lives: Neuronal and organismal lifespans decoupled Mar 27, 2013 | 4.9 / 5 (8) | 0
- Sizing things up: The evolutionary neurobiology of scale invariance Feb 28, 2013 | 4.8 / 5 (10) | 14
Classical and Quantum Mechanics via Lie algebras
Apr 15, 2011 I'd like to open a discussion thread for version 2 of the draft of my book ''Classical and Quantum Mechanics via Lie algebras'', available online at http://lanl.arxiv.org/abs/0810.1019 , and for the...
- More from Physics Forums - Independent Research
More news stories
No new human cases of the H7N9 virus have been recorded in China for a week, national health authorities said, for the first time since the outbreak began in March.
Diseases, Conditions, Syndromes 33 minutes ago | not rated yet | 0
A Nobel prize-winning scientist Tuesday played down "shock-horror scenarios" that a new virus strain will emerge with the potential to kill millions of people.
Diseases, Conditions, Syndromes 51 minutes ago | 5 / 5 (1) | 0
Bacteria resistant to the antibiotic colistin are also commonly resistant to antimicrobial substances made by the human body, according to a study in mBio, the online open-access journal of the American Society for Microb ...
Diseases, Conditions, Syndromes 5 hours ago | 5 / 5 (1) | 0
(AP)—Federal investigators probing the hantavirus outbreak blamed for three deaths at Yosemite National Park recommend that design changes to tent cabins and other lodging run by private concessionaires first be reviewed ...
Diseases, Conditions, Syndromes 11 hours ago | not rated yet | 0
A new diagnostic test for a worm infection that can lead to severe enlargement and deformities of the legs and genitals is far more sensitive than the currently used test, according to results of a field ...
Diseases, Conditions, Syndromes 12 hours ago | not rated yet | 0 |
(Medical Xpress)—A three-year multinational study has tracked and detailed the progression of Huntington's disease (HD), predicting clinical decline in people carrying the HD gene more than 10 years before ...
44 seconds ago | not rated yet | 0
1 hour ago | not rated yet | 0 |
(Medical Xpress)—A research team, led by Jeremy Barr, a biology post-doctoral fellow, unveils a new immune system that protects humans and animals from infection.
11 hours ago | 4.6 / 5 (13) | 5 |
New research suggests that a compound abundant in the Mediterranean diet takes away cancer cells' "superpower" to escape death. By altering a very specific step in gene regulation, this compound essentially re-educates cancer ...
14 hours ago | 4.8 / 5 (12) | 2 |
Children who have suffered maltreatment are 36% more likely to be obese in adulthood compared to non-maltreated children, according to a new study by King's College London. The authors estimate that the prevention or effective ...
1 hour ago | not rated yet | 0
Salamanders' immune systems are key to their remarkable ability to regrow limbs, and could also underpin their ability to regenerate spinal cords, brain tissue and even parts of their hearts, scientists have ...
14 hours ago | 4.8 / 5 (6) | 2 |

News tagged with renewable energy
Related topics: energy , wind turbines , electricity , solar panels , fossil fuels
Renewable energy is energy generated from natural resources—such as sunlight, wind, rain, tides, and geothermal heat—which are renewable (naturally replenished). In 2006, about 18% of global final energy consumption came from renewables, with 13% coming from traditional biomass, such as wood-burning. Hydroelectricity was the next largest renewable source, providing 3% of global energy consumption and 15% of global electricity generation.
Wind power is growing at the rate of 30 percent annually, with a worldwide installed capacity of 121,000 megawatts (MW) in 2008, and is widely used in European countries and the United States. The annual manufacturing output of the photovoltaics industry reached 6,900 MW in 2008, and photovoltaic (PV) power stations are popular in Germany and Spain. Solar thermal power stations operate in the USA and Spain, and the largest of these is the 354 MW SEGS power plant in the Mojave Desert. The world's largest geothermal power installation is The Geysers in California, with a rated capacity of 750 MW. Brazil has one of the largest renewable energy programs in the world, involving production of ethanol fuel from sugar cane, and ethanol now provides 18 percent of the country's automotive fuel. Ethanol fuel is also widely available in the USA. While most renewable energy projects and production is large-scale, renewable technologies are also suited to small off-grid applications, sometimes in rural and remote areas, where energy is often crucial in human development. Kenya has the world's highest household solar ownership rate with roughly 30,000 small (20–100 watt) solar power systems sold per year.
Some renewable energy technologies are criticised for being intermittent or unsightly, yet the renewable energy market continues to grow. Climate change concerns coupled with high oil prices, peak oil and increasing government support are driving increasing renewable energy legislation, incentives and commercialization. New government spending, regulation, and policies should help the industry weather the 2009 economic crisis better than many other sectors.
This text uses material from Wikipedia and is available under the GNU Free Documentation License.

Breast cancer represents one of the most common cancers among women in the United States. Data indicates that more than 180,000 American women received a diagnosis of breast cancer in 2009. The various risk factors include: the female gender, heredity, genetic factors, aging and idiopathic causes.
What You Should Know About Breast Cancer
The short answer to what you should know about breast cancer is that it’s a malignant tumor in the breast tissue. With non-invasive breast cancer, the tumor stays localized and does not spread (metastasize) from its origin of growth. Experts refer to this as “Carcinoma in Situ”. The tumor occurs in and remains confined to the ducts (ductal carcinoma in situ) or confined to the lobules (lobular carcinoma in situ).
“Duct” and “Lobules” refer to the milk duct and the milk producing glands, respectively, in the mammary glands. Most breast cancers start in the ducts and spread to other tissues. Lobular carcinoma doesn’t meet the criteria of a true cancer by itself, but is a marker for many other types of cancer – both invasive and non-invasive.
An invasive tumor spreads beyond its area of origin and can have three different stages of invasiveness – localized, regional and distant stages. As the names suggest localized types include those which remain localized to the breast tissues, the regional stage refers to the spread of the tumor to the tissues surrounding the breast (e.g. – lymph nodes) and the distant tumors are those that spread away from the breast to other tissues and organs. Needless to mention, patients with distant tumors are not easily managed.
About Breast Cancer Stages
Doctors base breast cancer stages on the tumor size, nodal status (involvement of lymph nodes) and degree of spread (metastasis) tumors are grouped into 5 stages – 0 to IV. Stage zero means the carcinoma cells confined to the duct or lobule and has not spread elsewhere. This is the foremost stage of breast cancer.
In stage I the tumor is very small – less than or equal to 2 cm in diameter and is confined to an area in the breast, not spread to the lymph nodes or surrounding tissues. In stage II, the tumor grows to 1-2 inches in diameter and cancer cells appear at the lymph nodes. Sometimes the tumor is even bigger than 5cms, but the lymph nodes remain unaffected. In stage III, the tumor grows more than 5 cm and spreads to the lymph nodes and sometimes even to multiple lymph nodes, skin and chest wall. Stage IV is the last one and in this case the cancer spreads to somewhere else in the body.
Diagnostic Tests for Breast Cancer
A biopsy of the tumor determines the type of cancer. This enables the doctors to freeze on the treatment methods and also to figure out how quickly the cancer might grow. The hormone receptor status and HER2 status of the patient is also of prime importance to the doctors, because female hormones estrogen and progesterone play a vital role in the development of some cancer types. “ER+” and “PR+” are, respectively, estrogen receptor positive and progesterone receptor positive tumors. Hormonal therapy has been found to be beneficial in patients with such tumors. HER2 status also influences the mode of treatment.
Therapy and Treatment of Breast Cancer
The most widely used breast cancer treatment methods include mastectomy and lumpectomy procedures. The former refers to the removal of the entire affected breast through surgery and the latter refers to the removal of only the tumor and some surrounding tissues believed to contain the roots of the tumor.
As is the case with most cancer types, the cancer cells in breast cancer are too tiny for detection and doctors cannot rule out the chances that some cells will remain in the body, even after a successful surgery. The leftover cells can cause recurrence. To rule out recurrence adjuvant therapies are advised.
Such therapies include:
- Hormonal therapy
- Targeted biological therapy
In chemotherapy, the oncology health care team will administer a chemical to the patient (usually intravenously, but sometimes orally) to disrupt communication and growth of the cancerous cells. Hormonal therapy involves dosing the patient with a drug that works to bring down the estrogen levels or reduce its action.
Experts believe estrogen promotes growth in some tumors. In targeted biological therapy, doctors inject the body with monoclonal antibodies trained to recognize and destroy certain proteins and cells (the cancerous cells) through phagocytosis (mechanism of destruction through immune system).
How to Cope with Breast Cancer
It’s important that breast cancer patients get rid of the fear and traumas associated with the diagnosis and actually try to understand the disease. This will help them manage it more effectively:
- Share your feelings with the near and dear ones.
- Joining a support group helps get rid of the so called “blues”.
- Indulge in activities of interest like books, music, movies etc.
- Eat healthy, think healthy.
- Take rest.
Talk to your doctor about changes in symptoms etc. and discuss ways to manage them in the best possible manner.
About the Author: Jessica Palin works as a health writer and blogger for Robertgrantmd, (New York plastic surgery). She researches and writes about a variety of women’s health topics from breast cancer and weight loss to pregnancy tips. Her special interest involves exploring the new trends in beauty and plastic surgery treatments for both men and women.
Images: embracinghealthblog dot com

The Oregon Trail opened the way west for intrepid settlers and enterprising miners. Once it was well established and the roads were cleared and expanded, once towns had grown up along the route and locations in the Rockies and further west were settled, it was only natural that a new method of transportation would take over: stagecoaches.
The technology behind stagecoaches wasn’t new. Carriages were the primary form of mass transportation in the pre-locomotive age. What made stagecoaches different from regular carriages were their size and the way they were supported on the wheel frame. Rather than relying on springs, which jostled a rider up and down, stagecoaches made use of thoroughbraces, leather straps that supported the body of the stagecoach and gave it more of a rocking motion.Stagecoaches could generally fit nine passengers inside and six outside. Inside, as you can probably guess, meant that passengers traveled inside the body of the coach. They would ride on three benches, two facing forward and the foremost one facing backwards, three riders to a bench. As you can imagine, it was a tight squeeze. Passengers in the first two benches would often have to wedge their knees between one another to make room. They would carry their baggage and often have mail under their feet. But if that wasn’t bad enough, the six passengers riding outside of the carriage would be just as cramped and exposed to the elements.
But what passengers lost in comfort, they made up for in speed. The most common type of stagecoach was the Concord stagecoach, manufactured in Concord, New Hampshire. These stagecoaches rarely broke down. They were drawn by a team of six horses and could cut through the new roadways of the west much faster than any wagon train ever could.
This is part of the reason that almost all stagecoaches carried mail as well as passengers. More than just mail, in fact. It was common for stagecoaches to carry gold and cash being transported on behalf of one bank or another. This, of course, meant that there was a real danger of robberies along the road.
The first major stagecoach robbery in California took place in 1852 when Reelfoot Williams and his gang robbed a Nevada City coach. The gang had set up a network of informants to monitor when stages were coming and what money and passengers they were carrying. They carried off the heist, setting a precedent that many would follow. For that reason, and because of the very real threat of attacks by Native Americans, passengers were advised to carry guns and knives with them and drivers were well armed.
So, you might ask yourself. Who was in charge of all these stagecoaches? You probably already know the answer without knowing it. There were several stagecoach companies in the east that had been in operation even before the 19th century. But one of the biggest and most successful companies developed in the 1830s as a service to deliver packages between Boston, New York, and Philadelphia. Adams & Company gradually moved west as steamships replaced overland routes for fast transportation between the major eastern cities.
Adams & Company did well in California after the gold rush, until mismanagement and the emergence of a serious competitor changed everything. That competitor was a little company started by two men, Henry Wells and William G. Fargo. The company that Wells and Fargo started offered more than just stagecoach service. It offered banking and mail services as well. In fact, by the time the 1850s rolled around, Wells Fargo was widely known to be faster and more reliable about delivering the mail than the U.S. Postal service.
Then came the Panic of 1855. The California banking system, puffed up on speculation of continued profits from the Gold Rush, collapsed. Many businesses, including Adams & Company, folded. But Wells Fargo managed to hold on. Not only did it hold on, it emerged as one of the only viable options in stagecoach transportation.
Since Wells Fargo pretty much had a monopoly on stagecoach transportation in the west after 1855, they could make the rules. And some of those rules were:
Abstinence from liquor is requested, but if you must drink share the bottle. To do otherwise makes you appear selfish and unneighborly.
If ladies are present, gentlemen are urged to forego smoking cigars and pipes as the odor of same is repugnant to the gentler sex. Chewing tobacco is permitted, but spit with the wind, not against it.
Gentlemen must refrain from the use of rough language in the presence of ladies and children.
Buffalo robes are provided for your comfort in cold weather. Hogging robes will not be tolerated and the offender will be made to ride with the driver.
Don’t snore loudly while sleeping or use your fellow passenger’s shoulder for a pillow; he or she may not understand and friction may result.
Firearms may be kept on your person for use in emergencies. Do not fire them for pleasure or shoot at wild animals as the sound riles the horses.
In the event of runaway horses remain calm. Leaping from the coach in panic will leave you injured, at the mercy of the elements, hostile Indians and hungry coyotes.
Forbidden topics of conversation are: stagecoach robberies and Indian uprisings.
Gents guilty of unchivalrous behavior toward lady passengers will be put off the stage. It’s a long walk back. A word to the wise is sufficient.*
So there you have it. Stagecoach transportation in the Old West. Traveling by stagecoach was the only way to go in those days … until the railroad came along and changed everything….

A machine for turning, that is, for shaping articles of wood, metal, or other material, by causing them to revolve while acted upon by a cutting tool.
Basically, a machine that fashions work by making the work turn on an axis. The cutting is done by a tool that is not rotating. On wood lathes the wood usually turns between the headstock and the tailstock. The turner holds the tool by hand and moves it to cut various shapes on the wood. On metal lathes the work (whatever material is being fashioned) turns and the tool is held rigid whilst the operator moves the tool using hand wheels. Lathes are very versatile, come in a myriad of styles, and many contradict the above definitions. Wood can be cut in any metal lathe and soft metals can usually be cut on wood lathes.
A machine that is used for working metals and plastics by rotating about the horizontal axis against a tool that shapes it.
A machine that spins timber, This makes it unique as all other power tools move whilst the timber remains static.
A lathes is a machine which holds a piece of wood or metal between two centers and turns it so the work can be shaped by hand-held "turning chisels." Foot operated or hand cranked.
A machine designed to center a piece of wood on an axis: as it turns, the woodturner can cut into the wood to create symmetrical objects.
a machine that hold a piece of metal or wood and turns it rapidly against a cutting tool for shaping Finally, he used a lathe to shape the wooden bowl.
A machine on which logs are peeled to yield veneer for plywood.
machine tool for shaping metal or wood; the workpiece turns about a horizontal axis against a fixed tool
a common tool used in machining
a machine for changing the shape of a piece of wood, metal, etc
a machine for use in working metal or wood which holds the material and rotates it against a tool that shapes it
a machine in which a piece of wood is rotated around a fixed axis while being shaped by a fixed tool
a machine that cuts away small amounts of the comm to restore it to a trued state
a machine that holds the wood on a rapidly spinning axis
a machine that rotates a piece of wood to create a uniform circular design when the wood is cut with a chisel
a machine that turns metal , wood, etc
a machine tool for shaping metal or other material
a machine tool, specifically designed to help in the
a machine tool that generates circular sections by rotating the job around an axis and cutting it with a tool
a machine tool that removes unwanted material from a cylindrical work piece by rotating it against a cutting tool
a machine tool used to produce mechanical parts with cylindrical features
a machine used for shaping parts
a machine used for turning wood, metal and other materials by rotating the article against tools which cut it to shape
a machine used to turn rounded objects
a marvelous tool
an ancient tool that was used by the Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and other ancient and medieval peoples
an object created by revolving a spline curve, which determines the contour of the shape, around an axis
a power tool that spins the wheel around and slowly shapes it until all the sides are the same
a tool for making round things
a tool used to create objects with cylindrical symmetry such as table legs
a VERY easy to make primitive tool
a machine for shaping a piece of wood, metal, etc. by holding and turning it rapidly against the edge of the cutting tool.
A tool, usually free standing, for turning a piece while tools are held against it. Typically several feet long and about a foot wide. Different lathes are used for wood or metal (or glass) pieces. A lathe commonly has a headstock that grips the piece and has gears and a motor drive for turning the piece and a tailstock that guides the other end of long pieces. Most lathes allow working a piece held only at the headstock, as for making bowl shaped pieces. The tailstock is normally mounted on rails (the bed) so it can be moved accurately to different distances while remaining centered on the headstock. A wood lathe will have a tool rest to help guide the handheld tools along the piece while a metal lathe will have a solid tool holder with screw adjustments to withstand the increased force. Glass lathes are used to join medium and large diameter tubing for scientific glass work, keeping two tubes aligned as heat is applied all around the joint. rev.2003-02-27
A lathe is used for turning materials like wood and bone when they are being worked.
A machine tool by which work is rotated on a horizontal axis and shaped or cut by a fixed tool.
A machine which derives its usefulness by rotating stock against which tooling may be brought to bear. Springs are often wound on a lathe.
Power tool, which is used to turn wood or metal objects so that cutting tools may shape it while it, rotates.
Machine for shaping turned parts by the application of cutting edges against the revolving wood.
A lathe is a machine tool which spins a block of material to perform various operations such as cutting, sanding, knurling, drilling, or deformation with tools that are applied to the workpiece to create an object which has symmetry about an axis of rotation.
In 3 D computer graphics, a lathed object is a 3D model whose vertex geometry is produced by rotating the points of a spline or other point set around a fixed axis. The lathing may be partial; the amount of rotation is not necessarily a full 360 degrees. The point set providing the initial source data can be thought of as a cross section through the object.
A metal lathe is generic description for a rigid machine tool designed to remove material from a workpiece, through the action of a cutting tool. They were originally designed to machine metals however with the advent of plastics and other materials, and with their inherent versatility, they are used in a wide range of applications, and a broad range of materials.

Venerated from the early centuries of Christianity, Saint Christopher—whose name means "Christ-bearer"—was honored as the protector of travelers. According to "The Golden Legend," Christopher ferried a small child across a river. As he did so, the child's weight grew increasingly heavy. When Christopher complained that it seemed as if he had carried the weight of the world, the child replied, "Wonder not, Christopher, for not only has thou borne the whole world upon thy shoulders, but Him who created the world. For I am Christ thy King." In this imposing statuette-reliquary, Christopher strides through the water, twisting as he turns to look at the Christ Child, who holds an orb in reference to his dominion. The small leaves sprouting from the top of Christopher's staff are a harbinger of the miracle promised by Christ—that if the saint, upon his return home, planted the staff in the ground, it would bear leaves and fruit in the morning.The hallmarks stamped on the hem of the saint's cloak and on the statue's base indicate that this piece was made by a goldsmith in Toulouse. The reliquary, excellently preserved, reveals a masterful treatment of the material. The soft, rich folds of the saint's cloak belie their metal substance. The ungilded surfaces of the faces are framed by the crisp design of the hair. The engraving of the short curls of the Christ Child, the hair and flowing beard of the saint, and the fish in the turbulent water are accented by the juxtaposition of large areas of silver with bright flashes of gilding. A now-lost relic of the saint was placed in the small box covered with crystal on the statue's base, through which the relic could be seen.

Halloween blackout of '57 spurs creation of portable pacemakerby Lorna Benson, Minnesota Public Radio
Fifty years ago a massive Halloween blackout disrupted power across a highly populated section of Minnesota and western Wisconsin. People from St. Cloud to Faribault, the Twin Cities and Eau Claire had no electricity for up to three hours. For most, the outage was simply inconvenient. But for a few young heart patients connected to pacemakers it was life-threatening. The blackout did spur the creation the first portable, battery-powered pacemaker.
Minneapolis, Minn. — At the University of Minnesota hospital 50 years ago, surgeons had recently started using pacemakers to help children recover from heart surgery. The devices plugged into a wall socket, so when the power went out in patients' rooms, their pacemakers stopped working too.
It's hard to piece together exactly what it was like at the hospital during the blackout. But what can be gleaned from old newspaper accounts paints a frenzied picture, according to historian Jack Norton.
"They had police officers pull up to the side of the surgery suites and simply turn on their headlights to provide light for the surgeons," says Norton. "They scrambled to try and keep blood cold by grabbing ice from various coolers to stick in the blood refrigerator."
Norton dug up dozens of newspaper stories about the blackout while doing research for Medtronic. He says the articles show that the university hospital had no reason to suspect it was vulnerable to a power failure because it was connected to two different power plants.
"They thought if one of them went down, the other would provide them with electricity," says Norton.
But this was a rolling blackout that took down plants all across the power grid. No one anticipated that happening, Norton says.
"It's a nightmare scenario and there's a certain amount of irony that it happens on Halloween, that this nightmare in critical care happens on the day when we all know it's famed for scary happenings."
Probably the scariest place to be that morning was the children's cardiac recovery unit. A number of young kids were connected to pacemakers after undergoing heart surgery.
When the power went off, doctors scrambled to find drugs to keep their patients hearts pumping. Still, one child didn't survive the three hour ordeal.
The trauma of that event rattled pioneering University of Minnesota heart surgeon C. Walter Lillehei. The next day in the hospital hallway Lillehei flagged down Earl Bakken, an electrical engineer who spent a lot of his time collaborating with university surgeons on new medical devices.
Bakken had just started Medtronic a few years earlier and was still running the company out of his garage. Bakken says Lillehei was clearly troubled about the blackout.
"We got together and talked about it and said we have to have some way to back these pacemakers up when there's a power failure," Bakken said in a recent interview.
Lillehei asked Bakken if he could create a portable pacemaker that ran on a battery.
"So we talked about well how do we do that? How do we get the battery backup?," says Bakken. "And I said, 'Well, we'll take a six volt automobile battery and then use an inverter to convert the six volts to 115 volts to run the pacemaker.'"
Bakken and a his employees built the device. Bakken says it would have worked fine, but the car battery produced more power than he needed for his pacemaker. So he started looking for alternatives.
Then he remembered an article he had read in his Popular Electronics magazine. It was about a new circuit for a metronome.
"A metronome has the same rates as heart rates," says Bakken.
The metronome circuit also had the advantage of being much smaller. Bakken's invention fit in a box about the size of a small paperback book, which meant the pacemaker could be placed in the bed with the patient, rather than on a medical cart next to the bed. Bakken took his new invention to the University of Minnesota and tested it out on a laboratory dog that had been given an artificial heart block.
"And I said, 'Okay now. This seems to work, so I'll go back to my garage and make a pacemaker we can use on humans,'" says Bakken.
But he never got the chance. When Bakken returned to the hospital the next day, he saw his invention being used in the recovery room.
"There was a child in there with this pacemaker connected to him...What a great feeling that is to see here's something we made with our own hands keeping this child alive."
Still Bakken wasn't convinced his portable pacemaker was really ready for human use. He sought out Lillehei and asked him why he didn't wait for the human version of the machine.
"And he said well as long as this battery operated pacemaker was available he wasn't going to risk losing another child to a power failure."
Bakken says it was probably inevitable that a portable pacemaker would have been invented in the 1950's even if he hadn't created the device. Surgeons at the time were making remarkable advances in treating heart conditions. He says the Halloween blackout simply highlighted the urgency in developing new medical technologies as fast as possible.
It's a trend that continues today.
Modern pacemakers have advanced considerably in the past 50 years. They're still battery operated. But they're much smaller. They fit in the palm of your hand. And they're no longer a piece of excess body baggage. They are implanted directly into a patient's chest, making it much easier for patients to lead normal lives.
- Morning Edition, 10/31/2007, 7:20 a.m.

DUE: MONDAY MAY 13, 2013
As we have discussed in class, Elijah is surrounded by an aura of mystery: we know nothing of his parentage; his tribe of origin and birthplace are unknown (though he is identified as a “resident of Gilead”); we are ignorant about his early life and call to prophecy; he travels widely, performs miracles, and of greatest importance, defies a conventional death, ascending to heaven in a fiery chariot instead.
Approximately four centuries after Elijah’s strange prophetic career came to a close, the prophet Malachi believed he would return to earth to fulfill another divine mission: “Behold, I will send the prophet Elijah to you before the coming of the awesome, fearful day of the Lord. He shall reconcile parents with children, and children with their parents, so that, when I come, I do not strike the whole land with utter destruction” (Malachi 3:23-24).
Later on in rabbinic literature and folk legends, Elijah would take on a mythical role as the prophet who wanders the world generation after generation, protecting the weak and disadvantaged, humbling the arrogant who persecute the powerless. Capable of any disguise, he travels unrecognized through crowds of people, mysteriously appearing when needed and then just as mysteriously disappearing, revealing his identity on rare occasions only. It is fair to say that Elijah has captured the religious imagination of Jews as few other figures have.
The final project for 8th grade TaNaKh will focus on Elijah’s larger-than-life role in Jewish literature and liturgy. Choose ONE of the following. Please note the final project is in lieu of a final exam, and will count significantly toward your grade — along with other factors like participation, conduct, effort and attendance. Here are your choices:
1. Draw 3-4 pictures about Elijah, each telling a different story. You may wish to draw upon the biblical texts or folk stories we have studied (listed below) in creating your images. At least one of your pictures should place the prophet in a modern context. If Elijah came back today where would he go and whom would he visit? What would he look like? Each of your pictures should be accompanied by a paragraph or two explaining the setting and the reasons for depicting the prophet as you have.
2. Create a folktale about Elijah. While drawing upon the biblical texts and folk stories we studied in class for inspiration, your literary effort should be creative, and not a simple retelling of a traditional story. I would encourage you to read Elie Wiesel’s powerful short story, An Evening Guest (copies will be available from Cassie Vichozsky as of 4/22, and will also be distributed at our next class), which places Elijah in a small Hungarian town in 1944 as a messenger sent to warn Jews about the Nazi death camps — it’s a great example of taking the traditional picture of Elijah . . . and then turning it inside out in a very compelling way. Your folktale should be no shorter than 3 pages (typed, double-spaced, 12-font type).
3. Research references to Elijah in the siddur and on religious occasions. At what ceremonies and celebrations do we invoke his name? Where in our liturgy does he appear? When and how did Elijah become connected with these particular rituals/prayers? Why do we mention his name at these specific times/places? Your research paper should be 4 pages at a minimum (typed, double-spaced, 12-font type).
4. Elijah has also captured the religious imagination of Christians and Muslims. Research how Elijah is depicted in Christian and Muslim Scripture and compare/contrast this with the ways in which Judaism describes his role. What are the similarities and differences in the Jewish understanding of the prophet Elijah and the way the other Abrahamic faiths view him? Your research paper should be 4 pages at a minimum (typed, double-spaced, 12-font type).
We have studied the following sources about Elijah:
First Kings, chapters 17, 18 & 19; Second Kings, chapter 2; Folk stories about Elijah (handout distributed in class from Peninah Schram’s Jewish Stories One Generation Tells Another).
First Kings, chapter 21; Malachi, chapter 3; Elie Wiesel’s short story, An Evening Guest (available from Cassie as of 4/22).

This sturdy, tannic, plumy red wine grape, a staple of Bordeaux for over a century, was in decline until it was discovered by Argentina. This was in fact a rediscovery, because Malbec's root origins in Argentina date to the days before phylloxera in the earlier 20th century. Its character is more plum-like than Merlot and slightly more tannic that Cabernet Sauvignon. It is still used in the French southwest in the dark, tannic wine of Cahors, where the grape is known as Cot. Though Chile and Australia also have adopted Malbec, it's Argentina that has made its reputation. There, it becomes a rich, lush red that can develop complexity as it ages.

The Predator. The Reaper. The Gorgon Stare. The Dennymite.
Today’s high tech UAVs have the lure of Hollywood to thank for their existence. One of the first drones was built by an English WWI pilot who hopped the pond to pursue his acting dream. In between small roles alongside Greta Garbo and Frank Sinatra, Reginald Denny turned his remote control airplane hobby into a military contract. His first RP-1, designed for military target practice, would become the US military’s first mass-produced unmanned aerial vehicle. “He pitched basically a radio controlled airplane to fly as a target,” says Tony Chong, the in-house historian at Northrop Grumman, which purchased Denny’s company in 1952. “A lot of people knew how to fly radio controlled planes back then. It wasn’t a big leap to teach military personnel how to use them.”
Reginald Denny, OQ-3 launch, 1940.
Denny (not to be confused with the L.A. riot’s Reginald Denny) named his company Radioplane and modified the design of his target drone, selling 53 RP-4s to the US Army in 1940. During World War II, the company manufactured 15,000 drones for the US Army from its factory at the Van Nuys Airport in Los Angeles. The Navy also got in on the action, calling their drones the TDD-1: “Target Drone Denny 1”. It wasn’t until the late 1940s that Radioplane started developing the technology to pre-program plane routes. The next step was fully autonomous systems, which were around as early as the mid-70s.
But before drones would become a strange sign of our robot future, Denny’s acting career would take off – he became a character actor, and appeared in Hitchcock’s Rebecca. And he and his enterprise might also take credit for helping to launch the career of the most famous actress ever. Denny, believing there was real ‘morale’ potential on his factory floor, urged the captain of the Army’s PR Hollywood division (Ronald Reagan, natch) to send over a photographer. And that’s where he found a young woman named Norma Jeane working the assembly line. Marilyn Monroe had been discovered.
How’s that for morale?

After the British Pyrrhic (costly) victory at Bunker Hill in 1775, British General William Howe decided a lethal blow needed to be delivered to the Patriot cause. Howe proposed to launch an attack on New York City using tens thousands of troops. He began mobilizing the massive fleet in Halifax, Nova Scotia. Meanwhile, American Commander-in-Chief George Washington had ordered General Charles Lee to prepare for the defense of the city. That June, Howe and 9,000 troops set sail for New York. Howe’s army was to be met in the city by additional regiments of German and British troops. Reinforcements from Halifax led by Howe’s brother would follow them.
Howe’s initial fleet arrived in New York Harbor and began landing troops on Staten Island. On April 27, 1776, British forces engaged the Americans at the Battle of Brooklyn Heights (also called the Battle of Long Island). Howe’s army successfully outflanked Washington’s, eventually causing the Patriots, after some resistance, to withdraw to Manhattan under the cover of darkness, thereby avoiding a potentially costly siege at the hands of the British.
After failed peace negotiations, the British Army next struck at Lower Manhattan, where 12,000 British troops quickly overtook the city. Most of the Continental Army had retreated to defensible positions at Harlem Heights and then to White Plains, well north of the city, but some soldiers remained at Fort Washington in Manhattan. Howe’s army chased Washington and the Continental Army into positions north of White Plains before returning to Manhattan. In Manhattan, Howe set his sights on Fort Washington, the last Patriot stronghold in Manhattan. In the furious, three-pronged attacked, British forces easily took the fort, capturing nearly 3,000 American prisoners and at least 34 cannons in the process. Most of the prisoners were taken to squalid British prison ships where all but 800 or so died of disease or starvation. General Washington, now at Fort Lee, directly across the Hudson River from Fort Washington, witnessed the events that happened. Following the fall of Fort Washington, British forces ferried up the Hudson River in barges toward Fort Lee. Washington ordered the evacuation of the fort’s 2,000 soldiers across the Hackensack River at New Bridge Landing. Washington would lead his army clear across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania.
Following the events in and around New York City, the outlook was bleak for the Continental Army. Morale in the army was extremely low, enlistments were ending, and desertions were commonplace. Even General Washington admitted his army’s chances of success were slim. Meanwhile, General Howe ordered his army into their winter quarters that December and established several outposts from New York City south to New Brunswick, New Jersey.

- Position your mouse pointer over the image.
- Click the right mouse button.
- Select the "Save Picture As" or the "Save Image As" menu item.
- Enter the directory and name of the file to create.
Need a World file?
Click the "World File" link located above the
image on the right to obtain the geographic reference
coordinates of the above image. Use your browser's File.SaveAs
menu option to save the World File to the same directory where
you saved the image. Make sure World File extension is
It takes a few
moments to construct a single image from the image tiles you
were viewing. The repeating "Your image is being constructed..."
message will be replaced with your image. Please be patient.
Once the image is
displayed, use your web browser's save picture or save image
function to copy your image to a location on your computer
system. On Microsoft Internet Explorer, you can save the image
by clicking on the image with the right mouse button.
A pop-up menu will
be displayed. Click the "Save Picture
As" menu item. On FireFox, right-click on the
image and select the "Save Image
As" menu item.
The web browser
will display a "Save Picture As" window. There will be "File name:" field
on the bottom of
the Save As window. Change the name of the file to your liking
and click the Save button. Windows
users, you should make sure you end your filename with the .jpg . All
images downloaded from
Microsoft MSR Maps are in the Jpeg image

New study challenges previous findings that humans are an altruistic anomaly, and positions chimpanzees as cooperative, especially when their partners are patient.
Researchers at the Yerkes National Primate Research Center, have shown chimpanzees have a significant bias for prosocial behavior. This, the study authors report, is in contrast to previous studies that positioned chimpanzees as reluctant altruists and led to the widely held belief that human altruism evolved in the last six million years only after humans split from apes. The current study findings are available in the online edition of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
According to Yerkes researchers Victoria Horner, PhD, Frans de Waal, PhD, and their colleagues, chimpanzees may not have shown prosocial behaviors in other studies because of design issues, such as the complexity of the apparatus used to deliver rewards and the distance between the animals.
“I have always been skeptical of the previous negative findings and their over-interpretation, says Dr. de Waal. “This study confirms the prosocial nature of chimpanzees with a different test, better adapted to the species,” he continues.

Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder announced on Twitter (@onetoughnerd) that he has signed Michigan's right to work laws. This makes Michigan the 24th state to protect workers from being forced to join a union. Earlier this year, Indiana became the 23rd state to do so.
"I have signed the freedom to work bills into law." - Gov Rick Snyder— Rick Snyder (@onetoughnerd) December 11, 2012
Often misunderstood, "right to work" is actually a simple and very limited policy. It prevents union contracts from making payment of union dues a condition of employment. That's all. Unions can exist, but can't force people to give them money. That is, unions must convince workers that the union does something or provides something worth paying for.
What anti-trust laws do to business, right-to-work laws do to unions: these laws prevent monopolies in order to protect consumers and workers.
One reason monopolies are disfavored was on display today on the Michigan Capitol lawn. As Lord Acton said, power corrupts, but it is absolute power that tends to corrupt absolutely. When a union is granted a monopoly, that power is eventually reinterpreted as a "right," and then as an entitlement. Defense of union power becomes an ends that justifies almost any means. And so in Michigan today, supporters of right to work were brutally assaulted and their property vandalized and destroyed.

The Jersey breed originated over 600 years ago on the Island of Jersey, located in the English Channel between France and England. Today, outstanding herds of Jerseys can be found from Denmark to New Zealand, from Canada to South America, and from South Africa to Japan.
The first Jerseys to be registered by the American Jersey Cattle Association were imported to the United States in 1850, but cattle from Jersey Island had been imported to this country much earlier. Today, there are almost 400,000 Jersey cows in the United States and they are an important part of the dairy industry in all 50 states. California has the most Jersey cows, followed by Wisconsin, Oregon, Pennsylvania, and Ohio.
Jersey calves weigh about 55 pounds at birth. Mature Jersey females usually weigh about 950 pounds and males about 1,500 pounds. Jerseys reach maturity the earliest of all dairy breeds and are efficient reproducers. They also have the longest productive life, or longevity in the milking herd, of any dairy breed. Jerseys are more tolerant of heat than the larger breeds, and are adapted to a wide range of climatic and geographical conditions.
Jersey milk has a rich, smooth flavor because it naturally contains higher percentages of protein, calcium, and other important nutrients than milk from other dairy breeds (for the latest milk test results, click here). The extra protein is the reason Jersey milk yields the greatest amount of cheddar cheese: 12.35 pounds of cheese from 100 pounds of milk. This compares to the yield of average milk produced in the United States of 10.04 pounds of cheese.
The Jersey is the most efficient dairy producer in the world, producing more pounds of milk per pound of body weight than any other breed. An average Jersey in the United States produces 16 times her bodyweight in milk each year, or about twice her body weight in Cheddar cheese. The Jersey production champion produced over 40 times her body weight in one year: 49,250 lbs. of milk containing 1,645 lbs. of protein. That is equal to 70,752 half-pint servings of milk, enough milk for an entire year's lunches in a school of 400 students.
The American Jersey Cattle Association was organized in 1868 to improve and promote the breed of Jersey cattle in the United States. It is located at 6486 East Main Street in Reynoldsburg, Ohio 43068. For more information, subscribe to the Jersey Journal or log onto the AJCA's website at www.USJersey.com. Jersey breeders in your area may be found by visiting the Jersey Directory Online and All-Jersey® distributors are listed on the Distributors page.

Iowa State University’s Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory (VDL) at Ames closely monitors the incidence of animal diseases, including those caused by swine influenza viruses (SIV).
The VDL uses state-of-the-art molecular diagnostic technology to diagnose SIV, track seasonal trends for prevalence and monitor which SIV strains or subtypes are most prevalent. This helps veterinarians and producers understand herd health status and appropriate vaccine or control measures.
The emergence of the H1N1 influenza A virus that sickened people has led ISU swine veterinarian and virologist K.J. Yoon and his team of molecular diagnosticians to analyze a bank of SIV viruses from case submissions from October 2008 to April 2009. The goal is to determine if the H1N1 flu virus is in the Iowa swine population. So far, screening of samples has not detected the Novel H1N1 virus in the domestic hog population.
“Each day we are learning more about this novel influenza virus,” Yoon says. “We are particularly learning about its genetic makeup. This virus was originally coined the name ‘swine flu’ as it contains viral components that have been previously identified in influenza viruses causing disease in pigs. However, this novel H1N1 virus has been reportedly spreading primarily from direct human-to-human contact, which is more similar to how emerging strains of ‘seasonal influenza’ are commonly transmitted. It is also important to understand that influenza virus is transmitted by direct exposure to respiratory secretions, and is not a foodborne illness or food safety concern.”
Diagnostic testing for the hybrid flu virus at the VDL is done by gene sequence analysis which takes up to seven days. ISU researchers are currently developing a high throughput polymerase chain reaction diagnostic test that will differentiate human, swine and avian viruses usually within 24 hours.
“We have an excellent team of applied veterinary diagnosticians and researchers working diligently to serve the emerging needs of our stakeholders helping safeguard both animal and human health,” says Rodger Main, DVM, director of ISU’s Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory Operations.

About 1 in 2,500 babies born in the UK has cystic fibrosis (CF). This inherited condition can affect the digestion and lungs. Babies with CF may not gain weight well, and have frequent chest infections. Screening means that babies with CF can be treated early with a high energy diet, medicines and physiotherapy. Although a child with CF may still become very ill, early treatment is thought to help them live longer, healthier lives. If babies are not screened for CF and they do have the condition, they can be tested later but parents may have an anxious time before CF is recognised.

A mask carved from a human skull, the nose and tongue skewered by ceremonial daggers. This artifact, on display at the Field’s exclusive and expansive new exhibit, “The Aztec World,” exemplifies the most shocking aspects of the Mesoamerican tribe that, in just 200 years, shaped the foundations of modern-day Mexico. Caricaturized in the popular media as brutal and blood-thirsty, the Aztecs were in actuality a deeply complex, sophisticated society fascinated with dyads: male and female, light and darkness, life and death. This assemblage of nearly 300 artifacts has been collected in collaboration with ten Mexican museums. The exhibit explores the stark and shocking duality of the Aztecs: an empire that embraced life through technical and artistic achievements, and death through ritual human sacrifice. Museum guests can view wares from the Great Aztec Market, which dwarfed its European counterparts, as well as large stone statues excavated from the “House of Eagles” and the Templo Mayor in Mexico City. Another artifact—a large, rabbit-shaped drinking vessel for the alcoholic pulque—exemplifies a little-known aspect of Aztec culture: a charming and whimsical sense of humor. The Aztecs saw a rabbit’s silhouette in the face of the moon, thereby associating rabbits with a popular nighttime activity: drunkenness. (Laura Hawbaker)
“The Aztec World” runs at the Field Museum, 1400 South Lake Shore, through April 19, 2009.
Leave a Reply
You must be logged in to post a comment.

By Vaudine England
BBC News, Hong Kong
A study by doctors in Hong Kong has concluded that epilepsy can be induced by the Chinese tile game of mahjong.
The study said the syndrome affects more men than women
The findings, published in the Hong Kong Medical Journal, were based on 23 cases of people who suffered mahjong-induced seizures.
The report's four authors, from Hong Kong's Queen Mary Hospital, said the best prevention - and cure - was to avoid playing mahjong.
The study led the doctors to define mahjong epilepsy as a unique syndrome.
Epileptic seizures can be provoked by a wide variety of triggers, but one cause increasingly evident to researchers is the playing - or even watching - of mahjong.
This Chinese tile game, played by four people round a table, can involve gambling and quickly becomes compulsive.
The game, which is intensely social and sometimes played in crowded mahjong parlours, involves the rapid movement of tiles in marathon sessions.
The doctors conclude that the syndrome affects far more men than women; that their average age is 54; and that it can hit sufferers anywhere between one to 11 hours into a mahjong game.
They say the attacks were not just caused by sleep deprivation or gambling stress.
Mahjong is cognitively demanding, drawing on memory, fast calculations, concentration, reasoning and sequencing.
The distinctive design of mahjong tiles, and the sound of the tiles crashing onto the table, may contribute to the syndrome.
The propensity of Chinese people to play mahjong also deserves further study, the doctors say.
What is certain though, is that the only sure way to avoid mahjong epilepsy, is to avoid mahjong, which for many people is easier said than done.

Assessing the effectiveness of a model program they developed, Dartmouth Medical School researchers Dr. W. Carl Cooley, adjunct associate professor in pediatrics, and Jeanne McAllister, research associate in pediatrics, review the experience of four practices in Vermont and New Hampshire who used their program to identify and implement changes to improve the care they deliver to children with special health care needs.
The concept of community-based "medical homes" places where care is managed through coordination of clinicians, educators, therapists, healthcare professionals, and caregivers has been advocated by national health policy makers and the American Academy of Pediatrics as the best model for providing systematic yet individualized care to children with complex conditions and multiple needs.
Still, the changes required for a practice to become an effective medical home can be difficult to make. "Introducing change into a busy pediatric practice is like trying to repair a bicycle while riding it," the authors write. "Even the most motivated practice finds change difficult to implement. Many primary care providers believe that implementing the medical home concept is the right thing to do but question how they can do so and remain solvent."
To make the process easier, the authors developed a medical home improvement tool kit that allows practices to look at key functions of the medical home, assess their own operation, and identify the steps and strategies they will follow to become a medical ho
Contact: Andy Nordhoff
Dartmouth Medical School

Like the Sound of Music‘s Von Trapp family hiding in the Alps, plants may find refuge from a warming climate in the mountains.
Research in the Swiss Alps suggests diverse mountain habitats could act as stepping stones to allow plants to escape into more hospitable hideaways as their usual homes heat up.
A large, flat savannah offers little variation in temperature. If the temperature warms up, the whole area warms up.
But Daniel Scherrer and Christian Körner from the University of Basel, Switzerland found a broad spectrum of habitats in the central Swiss Alps after studying an alpine meadow for two seasons. In the rugged mountain landscape, different conditions existed close together.
The plants growing in those varied conditions were adapted to the particular set of temperatures of the micro-climates, the scientists found. The research suggests that these plants could start growing in neighboring habitats as the temperature increases.
To test this, Scherrer and Körner used a computer model to simulate what would happen if the temperature went up 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit. They found that only 3 percent of all temperature conditions disappeared. Some of the cooler habitats shrank or shifted, but pockets remained. This suggests that plants have the opportunity to shift habitats, instead of just dying off.
Preserving mountain habitats is even more new important now in light of this research. A diverse Alpine meadow could save many different habitats, compared to a single habitat in a grassland of equal size.
“It is known from earlier geological periods that mountains were always important for survival of species during periods of climatic change such as in glacial cycles, because of their ‘habitat diversity,’” concluded Körner.
“Mountains are therefore particularly important areas for the conservation of biodiversity in a given region under climatic change and thus deserve particular protection,” Körner said.
Photo: Different habitats exist close together in the Alps. Wikimedia Commons

- It is not possible to clone Lonesome George now, but other endangered animals have been successfully cloned.
- In the future, cloning and further studying Lonesome George might be possible, so scientists are focusing on preserving his tissues now.
- Biobanks known as "frozen zoos" hold tissues and other remains of certain endangered animals.
The recent death of Lonesome George, the famed Galapagos tortoise believed to be the last representative of his subspecies, has many experts wondering how we should try to save other endangered and at-risk animals.
Cloning is one option. While cloning methods for reptiles are not as advanced as those for mammals, scientists also say they face other incredible obstacles.
"At the most, I could envision one male turtle of this subspecies cloned in future or maybe two males, but where are you going to get a female?" asked Martha Gomez, a senior scientist with the Audubon Nature Institute, which has one of the world's few "frozen zoos."
Frozen Zoos stockpile biological materials from a wide variety of rare and critically endangered species. The biological material is usually composed of gametes (sperm and egg cells), embryos, tissue samples, serum and other items. Together, they represent a bank vault of irreplaceable genetic information that can be preserved for possibly hundreds of years or more. In most cases, the materials are stored in holding tanks filled with liquid nitrogen.
Oliver Ryder, director of genetics at the San Diego Zoo, spoke to Discovery News as his team was racing to the Galapagos Islands to help preserve the tissues of Lonesome George. The San Diego Zoo operates one of the other few frozen zoos.
"This is an extremely urgent matter," Ryder said. "We had planned to meet in the Galapagos in two weeks to discuss preservation of the tortoises there. It is a bitter irony that Lonesome George died before we could even finish setting up the plans. It underscores the importance of preserving such animals."
"We are facing some logistical problems now, but we don't want to look back with 'what if's,'" he added. "This may be the only chance we'll have to preserve, document and study this tortoise subspecies."
Ryder believes discussions of cloning Lonesome George are premature at this point. Before that takes place, he thinks more must be learned about this particular tortoise's physiology and reproduction. Studying Lonesome George's remains may also help to reveal how tortoises often live to advanced ages, information that could one day lead to breakthroughs in extending human lifespans.
For cloning, researchers are focusing more on "species where we have detailed knowledge of their reproductive biology," Ryder said. That is one reason why cats, dogs and mice were among the first animals to be cloned. Scientists are now working to clone endangered relatives of such animals, in hopes of releasing those individuals into the wild to strengthen natural populations.
Earlier this year, Gomez and her colleagues successfully cloned endangered black-footed cats. An endangered wild ox, called a gaur, and a banteng (wild cattle) have also been successfully cloned. Work is underway to clone and otherwise increase the population of Sumatran rhinos, which presently number only about 200-300 in the wild.
While one healthy clone is an interesting novelty, clones must also be able to reproduce in order to be fully successful. Gomez said that kittens of cloned wild cat parents have died "due to problems with nuclear programing," but some normal kittens have resulted and continue to thrive.
Both she and Ryder say that there is no international policy calling for cloning and preservation of highly endangered species. Instead, isolated facilities and the work of dedicated individuals are responsible for the successes.
"The effort needs to be more widespread and organized," Gomez said.
Through published papers and talks, Ryder and his colleagues have repeatedly called for an organized global effort. It would need an "overarching international body" on par with UNESCO, he believes.
"The first step is saving tissue samples, as we're in the process of doing for Lonesome George," he said. "But we who are among the forefront would like to train others to establish frozen zoo biobanks in other countries."
"I am confident that one day such an international structure will come together, bringing in other conservation work, such as preserving habitat," Ryder concluded. "It's poignant to lose a subspecies like that of Lonesome George. People in the future will be looking back at us, wondering why we didn't act sooner."

for National Geographic News
Explosive population growth is driving human evolution to speed up around the world, according to a new study.
The pace of change accelerated about 40,000 years ago and then picked up even more with the advent of agriculture about 10,000 years ago, the study says.
And while humans are evolving quickly around the world, local cultural and environmental factors are shaping evolution differently on different continents.
"We're evolving away from each other. We're getting more and more different," said Henry Harpending, an anthropologist at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City who co-authored the study.
For example, in Europe natural selection has favored genes for pigmentation like light skin, blue eyes, and blond hair. Asians also have genes selected for light skin, but they are different from the European ones.
"Europeans and Asians are both bleached Africans, but the way they got bleached is different in the two areas," Harpending said.
He and colleagues report the finding this week in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Snips of DNA
The researchers analyzed the DNA from 270 people in the International HapMap Project, an effort to identify variation in human genes that cause disease and serve as targets for new medicines.
The study specifically looked for genetic variations called single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs (pronounced "snips"), which are mutations at a single point on a chromosome.
(See an interactive overview of human genetics.)
"We look for parts of chromosomes that are common in the population but are new, and if they are common but recent, they must have gotten to high frequency by selection," Harpending explained.
SOURCES AND RELATED WEB SITES

This is outstanding, but how does the cerebrospinal fluid stop the brain receiving harmful pathogens in the same way that the blood would? Any answers welcome, I'm just interested!
Image courtesy J. Iliff and M. Nedergaard, AAAS
Green tracer molecules drift through cerebrospinal fluid crowding around a blood vessel. Image courtesy J. Iliff and M. Nedergaard, AAAS
Published August 16, 2012
Talk about brainwashing—a newfound plumbing system, identified in mice, likely helps the brain empty its waste, a new study says. Because mouse biology is similar to ours, the same findings should apply to people too, experts say.
Thanks to a blood-brain barrier—a natural wall that protects the brain tissue—the organ never touches blood, thus protecting it from microbes, viruses, and other pathogens.
To get nutrients to brain tissue and remove its waste, the brain makes a liquid called cerebrospinal fluid. But exactly how the fluid removes gunk generated by brain cells wasn't certain until now.
Watch a video explaining the newfound plumbing system.
Experiments in the 1950s and '60s hinted that diffusion—the passive method by which, say, food coloring spreads out in a glass of water—moved cerebrospinal fluid around the brain.
Yet this process is too slow to explain the brain's lightning-fast activity and immaculate cleanliness.
It turns out that, while studying brain tissue, the researchers in the 1950s and '60s unwittingly turned off the plumbing that washes the tissue.
"The idea of a cleaning system based on pressure has been around for a long time, but if you open the skull anywhere, like a hydraulic pump, it stops. They thought [the cleaning system] didn't exist," said study leader Maiken Nedergaard, a neuroscientist at the University of Rochester Medical Center.
The pump system is "on the order of a thousand times faster than diffusion," she said. "I'm surprised that no one had discovered this until now."
Brain Under Pressure
Nedergaard and her colleagues dubbed the newfound plumbing the glymphatic system, after neural tissue called glial cells, which power the flow of cerebrospinal fluid.
Glial cells do this by growing their "feet" around vessels and veins that carry blood, forming a sort of pipe around a pipe.
Tiny pores in this outer pipe then suck nutrient-rich cerebrospinal fluid from the blood vessels into channels dense with nerve cells, and pores at other locations pump the fluid out. The process simultaneously carries away the brain's waste while feeding its cells.
Nedergaard and her team used a special two-photon microscope, whose infrared light allows a deep, clear look into living brain tissue without harming it.
"These microscopes are revolutionizing neuroscience, and they've only become commercially available in the past five or six years," Nedergaard said.
Studying living mouse brains required opening their skulls. Yet unlike in previous experiments, the researchers sealed each hole with a tiny glass plate, keeping the fluid pressure while providing a window for the microscope.
Fluorescent dyes injected into the mouse brains then allowed the team to record movies of the cerebrospinal fluid moving through brain tissue.
"The fact we could look at it and make a movie was very important to showing the flow," Nedergaard said.
(See brain pictures.)
Brain Study Makes Scientist's "Heart Sing"
Clinical neuroscientist Bruce Ransom, who studies glial cells but was not involved in the study, said the work makes his "heart sing."
"It wasn't impossible to imagine that cerebrospinal fluid moves with enough force to be a garbage-disposal system, but that was always speculative," said Ransom, of the University of Washington in Seattle.
"This team, however, has done something very clever to find this system: demonstrate how it works and show it can vigorously wash away waste."
Now that the plumbing has been found, study leader Nedergaard and her colleagues are exploring its implications. A big one may be in its role in Alzheimer's disease, which is thought to arise when brain cells are killed by the accumulation of a protein waste called beta-amyloid.
"Next we need to move beyond mice," Nedergaard said. "We need to see if this same system exists in humans—which I suspect it does."
The study of the brain's plumbing system was published in the journal Science Translational Medicine.
These six scientists were snubbed for awards or robbed of credit for discoveries … because they were women.
Sweden needs garbage to maintain its energy habits, so it’s begun importing trash—just over 881,000 tons—from nearby Norway to do it.
A boulder-size meteor slammed into the moon in March, igniting an explosion so bright that anyone looking up at right moment might have spotted it.

Washington, Aug 9 (IANS) The formation in the air of sulphuric acid, which smells like rotten eggs, is significantly impacting our climate and health, says a study.
The study led by Roy Lee Mauldin III, research associate at the University of Colorado-Boulder's atmospheric and oceanic sciences department, charts a previously unknown chemical pathway for the formation of sulphuric acid, which can trigger both increased acid rain and cloud formation as well as harmful respiratory effects on humans.
Sulphuric acid plays an essential role in the Earth's atmosphere, from the ecological impacts of acid precipitation to the formation of new aerosol particles, which have significant climatic and health effects. Our findings demonstrate a newly observed connection between the biosphere and atmospheric chemistry, Mauldin was quoted as saying in the journal Nature.
More than 90 percent of sulphur dioxide emissions are from fossil fuel combustion at power plants and other industrial facilities, says the US Environmental Protection Agency, according to a university statement.
Other sulphur sources include volcanoes and even ocean phytoplankton. Sulphur dioxide reacts with hydroxide to produce sulphuric acid that can form acid rain, harmful to terrestrial and aquatic life on Earth.
Airborne sulphuric acid particles, which form in a wide variety of sizes, play the main role in the formation of clouds, which can have a cooling effect on the atmosphere, Mauldin said.
Most of the lab experiments for the study were conducted at the Leibniz-Institute for Tropospheric Research in Leipzig, Germany.

Glasses-free 3D is something available on just a handful of TVs, which manage it only through complicated hardware, and at no small cost.
Still, the effect is pretty smooth and no more tiresome for the eyes than glasses-assisted technology, from what we've been able to gather.
There is one more accomplishment that tech experts are looking for: holographic television, which offers a different perspective at the action, depending on the angle from which one beholds the TV.
Researchers from the Massachusetts institute of Technology (MIT) claim to have created something of the sort.
Called Tensor Display, it uses several layers of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) with a refresh rate of 360 Hz per second.
The technique is different from the one used in Nintendo's 3DS
, which has two layers of LCD screens (the bottom for light and dark bands and the top for the two slightly offset images).
The problem with this old method (a century old really) is that the only way so far known for creating multiple perspectives would rely on complicated hardware and algorithms. Hundreds of perspectives would have to be produced in order to suit a moving viewer, and that means that too much info has to be displayed at once.
Every frame of the stereo-3D video would need the screen to flicker 10 times, each with a different pattern. Thus, a convincing stereo-3D illusion would need a 1,000 Hz refresh rate.
MIT's Tensor Display lowers that requirement by using a higher number of LCDs, although it does bring another problem: the pattern calculation becomes more complex. Fortunately, the researcher had a convenient factor to exploit: not all aspects of a scene change with the viewing angle. This reduced the amount of information that needed to be sent to the LCD screens.
The end result was a panel that produces stereo-3D images based on calculations similar to those behind CT, X-ray and computed tomography, of all things (they produce 3D images of internal organs).
The Media Lab researchers will demo a Tensor Display prototype at Siggraph 2012 (5-9 August), made of three LCD panels. A second model will have two LCDs with a sheet of lenses between them (refract light left and right), primarily for wider viewing angles (50 degrees rather than 20).
Practical and commercial applications should appear soon, or at least sooner than any alternatives.
“Holography works, it’s beautiful, nothing can touch its quality. The problem, of course, is that holograms don’t move,” said
Douglas Lanman, a postdoc at the Media Lab.
“To make them move, you need to create a hologram in real time, and to do that, you need little tiny pixels, smaller than anything we can build at large volume at low cost. So the question is, what do we have now? We have LCDs. They are incredibly mature, and they are cheap.”

DUBAI, Jan. 20 (Xinhua) -- With new oil and gas nations coming up and renewable energy usage gaining global momentum, the fossil fuels-rich Gulf states might run into rough waters in the upcoming decades.
The Gulf states like Saudi Arabia and Kuwait are today synonyms for oil, but that could change soon.
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), the Gulf monopoly of oil supply is contested by the United States which is on the way to become the largest oil exporter throughout the world by 2030.
Meantime, Lebanon and Israel, two old arch-foes in the Middle East technically still at war, started digging deeply off the Mediterranean coast in search for oil and gas.
In addition, the global rise of solar power, wind energy and bio-thermal heat rivals the fossil fuels' monopoly as the only safe and reliable source of energy.
At the 6th World Future Energy Summit (WFES) that was held on Jan. 15-17 in Abu Dhabi, the participants were able to see how the world would function without the use of oil and gas or at least with less fossil fuels.
The Catecar, a Switzerland-based company, presented the Dragonfly, a solar-powered hybrid which does not need to be plugged because the solar panel is fixed on the roof.
Meanwhile, Abu Dhabi's environmental city Masdar launched a pilot project aiming at running sea-water desalination plants with solar or wind power by 2020 "in order to reduce the very expensive use of oil and gas to run such plants," said Dr. Sultan Al-Jaber, the chief executive of Masdar.
At present, half of the world's desalinated water is produced in the Gulf Arab region.
During the summit, the Abu Dhabi Urban Planning Council presented how we live next in the Estidama-house, a building equipped only with environmentally-friendly installations that secure an efficient use of water and electricity.
Washington's independence on Arab oil till 2030 would have deep implications for U.S. military bases in the region, where two thirds of the world's known oil reserves are located, the German daily Die Welt reported in a secret study which the German intelligence service BND released.
The report estimated that most of Middle Eastern oil would flow to East Asia.
Moreover, the United States is sitting on large shale gas reserves as a source of natural gas. Due to shale gas discoveries, the world's largest economy might also become autonomous in producing its own natural gas.
However, the method to access shale gas through "fracking" is strongly slammed by environmentalists who see huge danger for nature if shale gas is extracted from mountainous regions.
Meanwhile, Lebanon, known so far as the only Arab country without a desert and without oil, held the country's first International Oil and Gas Summit in Beirut.
The summit was held after an exploration company from Norway found huge gas reserves beneath the Eastern Mediterranean Sea offshore of Lebanon, which would have the potential of becoming a second Kuwait once it starts exporting gas.
Lebanon's southern neighbor Israel claims parts of that field known as Leviathan, comprising 17 trillion cubic foot of natural gas.
A Dubai-based economist, who requested anonymity, said that the disputed gas field might lay the foundation for the next Middle East war.
Morten Mauritzen, the president for the Gulf region at U.S. energy giant ExxonMobil, said at the energy summit in Abu Dhabi, which harbors some 7 percent of the world's known oil reserves, that the demand for oil and gas would rise 35 percent until 2040, dampening hopes that renewable energy like wind power, solar energy or thermal earth-heat would play a significant role in the future.
"Oil and gas are reliable, safe and accessible for all, while solar energy is not scalable to satisfy the huge demand," said Mauritzen.
According to ExxonMobil's forecast, world population will grow to 8.7 billion in the next 30 years, up from the current 7 billion.
ExxonMoil currently upgrades together with Abu Dhabi National Oil Company drilling technologies in the Upper Zakum, the world's largest offshore oilfield.
"We are reclaiming land to build four artificial islands in the Upper Zakum in order to build stations for machines and staff," said Mauritzen.
He noted that this was a unique example how oil exploration can be done in a cost-efficient way.

Warmer temperatures, variable monsoons, and other signs of climate change are a hot topic of conversation among many Himalayan villagers, according to scientific sampling of climate change perception among local peoples.
“This area is cold and it’s often raining. Even during the non-monsoon times there is mist and fog so inevitably conversations here turn to weather,” said Kamal Bawa, biologist at the University of Massachusetts, Boston (UMB), and president of Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE) in Bangalore, India. “When you stop and have a cup of tea in someone’s kitchen, the conversation invariably turns to the weather. But then they soon start talking about how the weather has been changing.”
Bawa is also a member of the National Geographic Committee for Research and Exploration.
Bawa didn’t set out to study Himalayan perceptions of climate change. But after hearing the same themes repeated again and again during household conversations he decided to investigate. With UMB graduate student Pahupati Chaudhary, he surveyed some 500 homes spread across 18 villages in Darjeeling Hills, West Bengal, India and Nepal’s Ilam district. The pair found some surprisingly consistent observations.
Three-fourths of the people surveyed believe that their weather is getting warmer and two-thirds believe that summer and monsoon season have begun earlier over the past ten years. Seventy percent believe that water sources are drying up while forty-six percent said that they think there is less snow on the high mountains.
Many villagers also told Chaudhary they’d noticed shifts in some species ranges and earlier flowering and budding of plants. New pests have also arrived, villagers routinely reported, to plague crops and people—including mosquitoes where none had been before.
Most of these changes were reported by much higher percentages of people living at higher altitudes than by those at lower altitudes. “We’ve shown in earlier research that people at high altitudes seem to be more sensitive to climate change, and of course it’s known that climate change is more severe at higher altitudes, so that’s not a surprise,” Bawa said.
Many Himalayan peoples live in areas where predicted and observed impacts of climate change, like species migration, are more acute. Many of them also live “close to the land,” where agricultural-based livelihoods make them especially attuned to weather patterns.
Listening to Locals Can Help Climate Science
Scientific data on climate change have been hard to come by in the region, Bawa reported. Few weather stations dot remote and high-altitude locales and where they do exist their data are often incomplete.
But where data can be found they seem to corroborate local observations, Bawa said, citing his own research on temperature and rainfall records as well as the work of other scientists listed in recent Biology Letters and Current Science reports of Bawa and Chaudhary’s research.
“Governments in the region are now gearing up towards more research,” Bawa said. “But it will take time to gather this climate data.” That’s why local knowledge can be such valuable human intelligence, he added. It can be gathered quickly and widely and used to “jump start” scientific efforts.
“There seems to be quite a bit of knowledge residing with local communities, in the Himalaya and elsewhere, and we can really use that knowledge to formulate scientific questions for further research and make more rapid assessments of the impacts of climate change.”
Bawa said it’s hard to determine to what extent local peoples are familiar with the global dialogue on climate change, or how much that might have influenced their perceptions. But most of those he spoke with didn’t identify a clear cause for the changes they’d observed.
“We’re saying that people seem to be aware that the climate is changing, but they may not necessarily be aware of why it’s changing. I think when you come to that question people don’t have any ideas—or they may have some very different ideas.”
Bawa pointed to a recent study of this topic in Tibet, where many respondents believed that humans are causing climate change—but not by producing greenhouse gasses as most climate scientists believe. “They seem to think that the climate is changing because the Gods are not happy and perhaps the people in the younger generations are not praying enough.”
This research was supported in part by a Committee for Research and Exploration grant of the National Geographical Society.

Use the back button to select a different record.
Librarians' Conference of the Kentucky Negro Educational Association
Start Year : 1935
End Year : 1956
The Librarians' Conference was established April 11, 1935, during the 59th Annual Session of the Kentucky Negro Educational Association (KNEA) in Louisville, KY. It was the first formal organization for African American librarians and teacher librarians in Kentucky. The group continued to meet annually during the KNEA Conference until desegregation in 1956, when it was subsumed into the Kentucky Education Association. For more see Librarians' Conference reports in the Kentucky Negro Educational Association publications from 1935-1956 at Kentucky State University and also available online in the Kentucky Digital Library - Journals.
Subjects: Librarians, Library Collections, Libraries
Geographic Region: Kentucky

Violence Against Women Act
March 24, 2008
The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) Renewal passes the House and Senate and signed into law
New law will safely and effectively meet the needs of more victims
The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) is the cornerstone of our nation's response to domestic and sexual violence. A strong bipartisan bill to reauthorize VAWA (S. 47) passed in the Senate on February 12, 2013 (78-22) and in the House of Representatives on February 28, 2013 (286-138). President Obama signed the bill into law on March 7, 2013.
YOUR calls made a difference! This is our collective victory for survivors. Want to make one more call? Visit our Legislative Action Center to find out how you can thank your Senators and Representatives for voting for VAWA.
What will this renewal of the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) change?
The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) has improved our nation's response to violence. However, not all victims have been protected or reached. VAWA 2013 will close critical gaps in services and justice. VAWA 2013 reauthorized and improved upon lifesaving services for all victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, dating violence and stalking - including Native women, immigrants, LGBT victims, college students and youth, and public housing residents.
VAWA 2013 also authorized appropriate funding to provide for VAWA's vitally important programs and protections, without imposing limitations that undermine effectiveness or victim safety.
Justice and safety for Native American Women: Native American victims of domestic violence often cannot seek justice because their courts are not allowed to prosecute non-Native offenders -- even for crimes committed on Tribal land. This major gap in justice, safety, and violence prevention must be addressed. VAWA 2013 includes a solution that would give Tribal courts the authority they need to hold offenders in their communities accountable.
Justice and safety for LGBT survivors: Lesbian, gay, bisexul and transgender survivors of violence experience the same rates of violence as straight individuals. However, LGBT survivors sometimes face discrimination when seeking help and protection. VAWA 2013 prohibits such discrimination to ensure that all victims of violence have access to the same services and protection to overcome trauma and find safety.
Safe housing for survivors: Landmark VAWA housing protections that were passed in 2005 have helped prevent discrimination against and unjust evictions of survivors of domestic violence in public and assisted housing. The law, however, did not cover all federally subsidized housing programs. VAWA 2013 expands these protections to individuals in all federally subsidized housing programs, explicitly protects victims of sexual assault and creates emergency housing transfer options.
Protections for immigrant survivors: VAWA 2013 maintains important protections for immigrant survivors of abuse, while also making key improvements to existing provisions including by strengthening the International Marriage Broker Regulation Act and the provisions around self-petitions and U visas.
Justice on campuses: College students are mong thos emost vulnerable to dating violence. Provisions in VAWA 2013 add additional protections for students by requiring schools to implement a recording process for incidences of dating violence, as well as report the findings. In addition, schools would be required to create plans to prevent this violence and educate victims on their rights and resources.
Maintaining VAWA grant programs: VAWA grants are effectively meeting the needs of millions of victims across the country. VAWA 2013 includes many important improvements to these grant programs, including allowing state domestic violence coalitions to be the lead applicant on the Grants to Encourage Arrest program; ensuring that specific stakeholders, including domestic violence coalitions, play a meaningful role in developing state STOP plans; and providing a formal process for the Office on Violence Against Women to receive coalition and other key domestic violence and sexual assault community input.
The Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) is effective and important:
VAWA creates and supports comprehensive, cost-effective responses to the pervasive and insidious crimes of domestic violence, sexual assault, dating violence and stalking. Since its enactment in 1994, VAWA programs, administered by the Departments of Justice (DOJ) and Health and Human Services (HHS), have dramatically improved federal, tribal, state, and local responses to these crimes.
- There has been as much as a 51% increase in reporting by women and a 37% increase in reporting by men.
- The number of individuals killed by an intimate partner has decreased by 34% for women and 57% for men, and the rate of non-fatal intimate partner violence against women has decreased by 67%.
- VAWA not only saves lives, it saves money. In its first six years alone, VAWA saved taxpayers at least $12.6 billion in net averted social costs. A recent study found that civil protection orders saved one state (Kentucky) on average $85 million in a single year.
- Find more information here.
Initially passed in 1994, VAWA created the first U.S. federal legislation acknowledging domestic violence and sexual assault as crimes, and provided federal resources to encourage community-coordinated responses to combating violence. Its reauthorization in 2000 improved the foundation established by VAWA 1994 by creating a much-needed legal assistance program for victims and by expanding the definition of crime to include dating violence and stalking. Its subsequent reauthorization in 2005 took a more holistic approach to addressing these crimes and created new programs to meet the emerging needs of communities working to prevent violence. Included in the 2005 reauthorization were new focus areas such as prevention, landmark housing protections for survivors, funding for rape crisis centers, and culturally- and linguistically-specific services. VAWA 2013 will ensure the continuation and improvement of these vital, lifesaving programs and laws.
NNEDV continues to be a leading force in efforts to reauthorize VAWA. NNEDV and its member state domestic violence coalitions also played a crucial role in the passage of VAWA in 1994 and its reauthorizations in 2000 and 2005.
NNEDV is currently working with state coalitions, national organizations, and Congress to ensure VAWA’s swift reauthorization and targeted investments in VAWA grant programs through the appropriations process.
NNEDV's Role in VAWA Reauthorization
NNEDV played an integral role in efforts to reauthorize VAWA. NNEDV and its member state domestic violence coalitions also played a crucial role inthe passage of VAWA in 1994 and its reauthorization in 2000 and 2005.
- NNEDV's press statements on VAWA
- NNEDV's President Kim Gandy on MSNBC
- NNEDV's Vice President of Development & Innovation Cindy Southworth on PBS
Learn More and Take Action:
- VAWA 2013 Reauthorization Factsheet
- S. 47 - The full text of the bill to reauthorize the Violence Against Women Act of 2013
- Legislative Action Center
Learn More About VAWA:
- VAWA 2005 Fact Sheet
- Section By Section Summary of VAWA 2005
- The Violence Against Women Act of 2005
The full text of the "Violence Against Women and Department of Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005" as signed into law on Jan. 5, 2006.
VAWA 2005 Technical Corrections
These corrections amended VAWA 2005, fixing minor errors.

A group of teachers were keen to
embed rich tasks from the NRICH website http://nrich.maths.org into their
curriculum for all KS3 and KS4 students. In this article, the
teachers share the issues they needed to consider and what they are
doing to address them.
The catalysts for change were our desire to:
These changes took some of us, and our colleagues, out of our
comfort zone as we adapted the way in which we worked in our
classrooms and tried out different roles for ourselves and our
We needed to take into account the different needs of individual
teachers in our schools and their students as they began to use
In order to improve BOTH teachers' and students' abilities to
work on the rich tasks, it was necessary to take account of, and
find ways of supporting:
The challenges involved in learning mathematics through rich
The use of a range of lesson structures
The use of effective questioning to promote thinking
In what follows, we have identified some problems from the NRICH
website, closely linked to the curriculum, which are ideal for use
by schools wishing to introduce rich tasks.
The aim is to be able to predict the area of any tilted
What areas are possible?
What areas are impossible?
Is there a connection between the "tilt" and the area of a
What observations, thoughts and conclusions can you offer?
The NRICH website offers Teachers' Notes to many problems. These
include suggestions for how the problems might be used in the
Briefly, introduce the environment with an interactive
whiteboard (IWB), or drawing diagrams on the board. Ask students to
work in pairs to find one or more ways to calculate the exact area
of the square displayed on the board.
Obtain suggestions, with students coming to the board to
demonstrate their methods, until the group seem confident with both
techniques i.e. 'boxing in' and dissection. Then pose the questions
Give them five minutes to work on their own/in pairs to think
about, and make some brief notes on how they will start working on
the problem and why they think such an approach would be
Share ideas about strategies as a whole group. They will need to
find ways of breaking the problem down working systematically and
keeping track of their data. It may be useful to stop the group and
share "good ideas" as work progresses. The aim is to mediate the
problem by encouraging systematic approaches.
As conjectures emerge ask learners to write them on a poster/the
board and ensure they have convincing arguments or proofs to hand
that can justify them. Encourage students to find clear concise
vocabulary to express their rules, and to express how certain they
are about them (e.g. probable pattern/result from
Choose four consecutive whole numbers, for example, 4 , 5 , 6
Multiply the first and last numbers together.
Multiply the middle pair together.
Choose different sets of four consecutive whole numbers and do
What do you notice?
Choose five consecutive whole numbers, for example, 3 , 4 , 5 ,
6 and 7.
Multiply the second and fourth numbers together.
Choose different sets of five consecutive whole numbers and do
What do you notice now?
What happens when you take 6, 7, 8,'?¦ n consecutive
whole numbers and compare the product of the first and last numbers
with the product of the second and penultimate numbers?
Explain your findings.
Establish that the group knows the meaning of 'consecutive' -
consecutive days, consecutive letters in the alphabet...
Choose four consecutive numbers and tell your students that you
will multiply the outer ones and the inner ones. Ask students to
pick their own sets of four consecutive numbers and do the same.
Record all the results on the board. What do they notice?
Will this always happen? Even with consecutive negative
How could we explain it? Encourage algebraic and geometric
Much of what will follow will depend on the arithmetical and
algebraic confidence of the group. Use the extension and support
remarks below to indicate the best way to use this resource beyond
the questions in the problem.
This problem only operated on the end numbers and the 'end but
one' numbers. Could you make a more general statement and justify
If you have an odd number of consecutive numbers, what's the
difference between the product of the end numbers and the square of
the middle number?
This problem could also be approached purely numerically, as an
exercise in developing fluency with multiplication tables while
looking for pattern and structure.
A multiplication grid could be used for recording results, with
the pair products highlighted according to how many consecutive
numbers were being used.
Visualisation through blocks of dots or rectangle areas may help
students explain why their pattern must work in every case.
Imagine you have a large supply of 3kg and 8kg weights.
Four 3kg weights and one 8kg weight have an average weight of
How many of each weight would you need for the average (mean) of
the weights to be 6kg?
If you had other combinations of the 3kg and 8kg weights, what
other whole number averages could you make?
What's the smallest?
What's the largest?
Can you make all the whole number values in between?
What if you have a different pair of weights (for example 2kg
What averages can you now make?
Try other different pairs of weights.
Do you notice anything about your results?
Do they have anything in common?
Can you use what you notice to find, for example, the
combination of 17kg and 57kg weights that have an average of
44kg......of 52kg.......of 21kg.....?
Explain an efficient way of doing this.
Can you explain why your method works?
Given the original 3kg and 8kg weights, can you find
combinations that produce averages of 4.5kg ... of 7.5kg ... of
4.2kg ...of 6.9kg ...? Convince yourself that all averages between
3kg and 8kg are possible.
What averages are possible if you are allowed a negative number
of 3kg and 8kg weights?
You may initially wish to restrict the weights used to those
which have a difference of 2kg, then 3kg, then 4kg, etc. in order
to model working systematically, and to make the pattern of results
Some students may find multilink cubes useful to support their
Here are two examples of students work on Searching for
This is a game for two players.
You will need a 100 square which you can download or you can use
The first player chooses a positive even number that is less
than 50, and crosses it out on the grid.
The second player chooses a number to cross out. The number must
be a factor or multiple of the first number.
Players continue to take it in turns to cross out numbers, at
each stage choosing a number that is a factor or multiple of the
number just crossed out by the other player.
The first person who is unable to cross out a number loses.
Switch the challenge from winning the game to covering as many
numbers as possible. Pupils can again work in pairs trying to find
the longest sequence of numbers that can be crossed out. Can more
than half the numbers be crossed out?
This challenge could run for an extended period: the longest
sequence can be displayed on a noticeboard and pupils can be
challenged to improve on it; any improved sequences can be added to
Ask pupils to explain why their choice of numbers is good.
A semi-regular tessellation has two properties:
Can you find all the semi-regular tessellations?
Can you show that you have found them all?
To help you when you are working away from the computer,
multiple copies of the different polygons are available to print
and cut out.
Ask students to suggest shapes that could fit round a point.
Test out their suggestions.
Record what works and what doesn't.
e.g. 1 pentagon, 2 squares and 1 triangle don't fit round a
Why do some fit and some don't? Could you tell in advance,
without using the interactivity?
Elicit from students the idea that the interior angles of
regular polygons are a crucial factor in determining whether the
regular polygons will fit together or not.
Before moving on to the computers ask students to work on paper
finding combinations of regular polygons that will fit round a
point. This may encourage students to work systematically when
using the interactivity provided. Resources are provided at the end
of the problem to support students working away from the
Challenge students to find all the possible semi-regular
tessellations and to provide convincing evidence that they have got
the complete set.
Each school worked in different ways. Here are examples of what
some of the schools did:
This is what the schools said about how their practice has
This article is the result of the collaborative work of:
Susanne Mallett, Steve Wren, Mark Dawes and colleagues from
Comberton Village College
Amy Blinco, Brett Haines and colleagues from Gable Hall School
Jenny Everton, Ellen Morgan and colleagues from Longsands Community
Craig Barton, Debbie Breen, Geraldine Ellison and colleagues from
The Range School
Danny Burgess, Jim Stavrou and colleagues from Sawston Village
Catherine Carre and Fran Watson and colleagues from Sharnbrook
David Cherry, Chris Hawkins and Maria Stapenhill-Hunt and
colleagues from The Thomas Deacon Academy.
Charlie Gilderdale, Alison Kiddle and Jennifer Piggott from the
NRICH Project, Cambridge

Throat cancer is a disease in which cancer cells grow in an abnormal way in the throat.
Cancer occurs when cells in the body—in this case throat cells—divide without control or order. Normally, cells divide in a regulated manner. If cells keep dividing uncontrollably when new cells are not needed, a mass of tissue forms, called a growth or tumor. The term cancer refers to malignant tumors, which can invade nearby tissues and spread to other parts of the body. A benign tumor usually does not invade or spread.
Factors that can increase your chance of developing throat cancer include:
- Age: 40 or older
- Sex: male
- Smoking or use of any tobacco products
- Excessive alcohol consumption
- Family history
- Vitamin A deficiency
- Diet low in fruits and vegetables
- Suppressed immune system
Infections caused by certain viruses such as:
- Epstein-Barr virus
- Human papillomavirus
- Radiation exposure
- Excess consumption of cured meats or fish
- Marijuana use
Exposure to certain materials such as in:
- Nickel refining
- Working with textile fibers
If you have any of these symptoms, do not assume it is due to throat cancer. These symptoms may be caused by other conditions. Tell your doctor if you have any of these:
- Sore throat
- Feeling that something is caught in the throat
- Difficulty chewing or swallowing
- Difficulty moving the jaw or tongue
- Voice changes or hoarseness
- Change in voice quality
- Pain in the head, throat, or neck
- Lump in the neck
- Unexplained weight loss
- Coughing blood
The doctor will ask about your symptoms and medical history. A physical exam will be done. The doctor may feel for any lumps in your neck. You may be referred to an otolaryngologist, a doctor who specializes in head and neck surgery.
Your bodily fluids and tissue may be tested. This can be done with:
Your internal structures may need to be viewed and examined. This can be done with:
When throat cancer is found, staging tests are done to find out if the cancer has spread. Treatment depends on the stage of the cancer.
Surgery removes the cancerous tumor and nearby tissue, and possibly nearby lymph nodes. In very rare cases, surgery to remove large tumors of the throat may also require removal of tissue for swallowing. As a result, food may enter the windpipe and reach the lungs, which might cause pneumonia. In cases when this is a risk, your surgeon may remove the larynx or voice box. The windpipe will be attached to the skin through a hole in the neck, which is used for breathing.
This is the use of radiation to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation may be:
- External radiation therapy—radiation directed at the tumor from a source outside the body
- Internal radiation therapy—radioactive materials placed into the throat in or near the cancer cells
This is the use of drugs to kill cancer cells. Chemotherapy may be given in many forms including pill, injection, and/or via a catheter. The drugs enter the bloodstream and travel through the body killing mostly cancer cells, but also some healthy cells.
Combined Modality Therapy
Often times, chemotherapy and radiation therapy are used together to kill cancer of the throat. This combined approach may be better than surgery or radiation alone.
To reduce your chance of getting throat cancer, take the following steps:
- Don't smoke or use tobacco products. If you do smoke or use tobacco products, get help to quit.
- Drink alcohol only in moderation. Moderate alcohol intake is two drinks per day for men and one drink per day for women.
- Eat a healthful diet, one that is low in saturated fat and rich in whole grains, fruits, and vegetables.
- See your doctor and dentist regularly for check-ups and cancer screening.

Oceana released a new report today outlining the shocking amount of subsidies that pour into Europe’s fishing industry. European taxpayers are essentially paying for overfishing – to the tune of 3.3 billion Euros ($4.6 billion) in 2009.
Here are some other stunning facts from the report:
- Oceana’s analysis found that a total of at least €3.3 billion of subsidies were available to the European Union fishing sector in 2009. This is more than three times quoted public figures, which only reference the European Fisheries Fund.
- Total subsidies to the fishing sector are equivalent to 50 percent of the value of the total fish catch by the European Union in the same year ( €6.6 billion)
- Spain, France, Denmark, the United Kingdom and Italy received the most fishing subsidies.
- 13 European Union countries had more fishing subsidies than the value of the landings of fish in their ports.
- Europe is one of the world’s top three subsidizers, along with China and Japan.
- As a result of these major subsidies, the European Union now has a fishing fleet that is two to three times larger than what is needed to fish sustainably.
- More than two-thirds of these subsidies have the ability to enhance fishing capacity and promote overfishing.
Check out the full report and pass it on!
- What Do Historic CO2 Levels Mean for the Oceans? Posted Tue, May 14, 2013
- U.S. Coast Guard Captures Illegal Fishermen in Texas Posted Tue, May 14, 2013
- Victory! Delaware Becomes Seventh State in U.S. to Ban Shark Fin Trade! Posted Thu, May 16, 2013
- It's Endangered Species Day! Posted Fri, May 17, 2013
- Stocks Show Signs of Recovery, But Still Work to Do Posted Fri, May 17, 2013

KIKUYU CULTURE & TRADITIONS
|Kenya is famous for its 42 cultures, but other than the nomadic Maasai and Samburu, not many of these are widely known to the outside world. A new cultural centre devoted to the Kikuyu, Kenya’s largest offers a unique experience of this tradition rich culture existing in a modern world.|
Riuki Cultural Centre is located not far outside of Nairobi, in the Kikuyu Heartland of Kiambu. The centre is run by Dr. Kinuthia Njoroge, who wanted to build a traditional Kikuyu village homestead to show local children the history and customs of their community.
The Kikuyu are the largest community in Kenya, and have always played a central role in the development of the independent Nation. For this reason, many may believe that modern influence has eroded the traditional way of life for this community, who mainly live around the capital city and the highlands.
But as Riuki demonstrates, this is not the case. While the traditional huts and ceremonies may be displays of a proud history, many of the same beliefs and customs persist in modern life.
In cuisine, music, marriage and everyday family life, most Kenyan Kikuyus still hold true to their identity. It is this pride that Riuki strives to encourage and strengthen, with its own blend of the modern and traditional.
Now visitors to Kenya can come to Riuki and spend a day learning more about this little known culture.
Welcomed to the centre by a group of elders, all of whom live in the local area, guests are welcomed in true Kikuyu style, with an invitation to drink from a horn filled with Muratina, a locally brewed drink.
There is a tour of a traditionally built hut with an explanation of how the traditional society operated. Communities always remained bound by strict and strong ties of clan loyalty and an even stronger sense of tribal unity - There was an age set system among young men, known as Mariika, but all clans and villages (itura) always paid deference to the wisdom and law of the tribe.
At Riuki, traditional songs, proverbs and dances bring the myths and legends of the Kikuyu to life.
According to Kikuyu mythology, all of creation began at the summit of Mount Kenya.
The icy peak was the realm of Ngai, the Supreme Creator, who descended from the heavens to his mountainous throne to survey his newly created lands. The mountain became Kirinyaga, his resting place, and it was from here that he called forth Gikuyu, the father of the Kikuyu people.
Ngai told him that all of the lands around Kirinyaga would be the home of Gikuyu and his children forever. He sent Gikuyu to grove of Fig trees, where he found a woman called Mumbi. This grove would become known as Mukuru wa Nyagathanga, the birthplace of all Kikuyu, still revered as a sacred place.
Among the fig trees, Gikuyu and Mumbi produced nine daughters- Wanjiku, Wanjiru, Wanjeri, Wambui, Wangari, Wacera, Waithera, Wairimu, and Nyambura. (Traditionally all Kikuyu girls should be given one of these names)
The girls grew into beautiful young women, who each full moon wandered the lands around Kirinyaga in search of men so that they could bear children. They begged their father to appeal to Ngai for help. Finally he bowed before the Mountain, and Ngai commanded him to make sacrifice among the figs and light a fire.
The sacrifice of a goat beneath a fig tree is still considered a way to call rain in times of drought, but in this first case it was a different form of life sustaining rain that Gikuyu sought. After the sacrifice he plunged nine sticks into a fire, and prayed. The fire erupted into an inferno, from which nine strong young men emerged. Giving thanks, Gikuyu took them back to his daughters, and the nine marriages were blessed by Ngai.
Each of the daughters made her own homestead, and nine separate clans of the Kikuyu were born. the unity of these clans was known as the Nyumba ya Mumbi, in honour of their Mother. The peak of Kirinyaga has since remained the sacred home of Ngai. As at Riuki, all Kikuyu homesteads were traditionally built to face this Holy Mountain.
A group of local women come to the centre to perform for visitors, with a series of dances traditionally performed at weddings and initiations and to sing songs. These are simple love and courting songs, traditional hunting songs and chants used when going to work in the fields.
The highlands of Kenya are rich fertile land, and this is a great farming culture- with a great cuisine that has grown from freshly grown vegetables.
The highlight of the day is a chance to sample a typical Kikuyu meal- delicious healthy food including sweet potatoes, Githeri (a maize and bean stew), Mukimo (a mashed combination of green peas and potato) with roasted goat and Irio, a great Kikuyu favourite.
There are also displays of traditional medicine, healing and divination.
Riuki can arrange extended programs to visit local farms and schools, or even to spend the night under the stars by a campfire on a traditional banana fibre mat, or to spend the night in a specially arranged homestay in a typical Kikuyu home.
For anyone with a free day in Nairobi, the Riuki Cultural Centre is an excellent way to discover more about another culture, and make many new friends along the way.
For more info click here Click here or email the Centre.

Irish Fiddle Lessons - Ian Walsh teaches the Irish Hornpipe The Golden Eagle.
Tags:How to Play the Song "The Golden Eagle" on an Iris,Ian Walsh,irish Fiddle Lesson,Learn To Play Fiddle,Learning Irish Fiddle,The Golden Eagle,Violin fiddle lessons
Grab video code:
Hi! Welcome to OnLineLessonVideos.com. I’m Ian Walsh and I’m going to teach an Irish tune today on the fiddle. It’s called the Golden Eagle and it’s a horn pipe. We’ll play it in the key of G.
I’ll start off by playing you a sample of the tune along to a quick track that I’ve set at about 70 beats per minute. So here we go with the Golden Eagle.
Let’s begin by leading into this tune with some pickup notes. We’ll start on the C, this is on the A string here. You work up A, B, C which plays right next to your first finger pretty much right on top of it. So that could be our first note and we’ll start with the triplet here. So three notes and then we’ll go to the G. So let’s just cycle through that a few times [Demonstration]. Try sliding into your first note, the C and I’ll give it a little bit of an aggressive edge [Demonstration].
Let’s take a look at another section here, we go down to our B on the g string and we play. So we’re crossing three strings, pretty quickly there and I’m not doing anything special with my bow. I’m keeping my bow movement short and I’m working at the top of my bow but I’m not slurring any notes, I’m going straight up and down here. So from B [Demonstration], so those notes are B, D, G, B.
Let’s take a look at another section here. We start with the open D. This is a little bit easier, you’re only working across two strings and you’re using your first and third fingers.
Let’s take a look at another one. This is more or less a G arpeggio and it starts on the G on the d string and we play [Demonstration]. So again, you’re moving across three strings here ending on the e string on that G note with your second finger.
So let’s go back to the beginning here and we’ll look at that pickup note, the C, B, A down to your first note of the tune, the G. Take a look at the second little section. You go down to that low B and all the way up to the B again. Then we look here to the low D [Demonstration] and then finally we have that G arpeggio [Demonstration].
Notice I’m leaving my fingers down on the A string here. You can visualize two of the double stamps that are readily apparent here for the G. You can use a G with a D with your A and your E string or you can do the G and the B. Leaving your fingers down can be good practice for getting your fingers just on the individual strings.
Let’s put all of these together and see what it sounds like. I’ll count us in, one, two, three, [Demonstration] one, two, three [Demonstration]. One more time, one, two, three [Demonstration]

Italian government scientists have claimed to have discovered evidence that a supernatural event formed the image on the Turin Shroud, believed by many to be the burial cloth of Jesus Christ.
After years of work trying to replicate the colouring on the shroud, a similar image has been created by the scientists.
However, they only managed the effect by scorching equivalent linen material with high-intensity ultra violet lasers, undermining the arguments of other research, they say, which claims the Turin Shroud is a medieval hoax.
Such technology, say researchers from the National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development (Enea), was far beyond the capability of medieval forgers, whom most experts have credited with making the famous relic.
keyboard shortcuts: V vote up article J next comment K previous comment

Railroad worker injuries are covered under the Federal Employees Liability Act which requires that a railroad maintains their fleet, ensuring that their trains are in good working order and free of defects. If a railroad does not comply with these standards, they may be liable for injuries to their workers. Damages railroad workers may receive include medical treatments, present and future lost wages and mental trauma. An injury on the railway can range from a minor sprain to a spinal injury so severe that it leads to death. Some of the most common injuries that affect railway workers are head trauma, knee injuries, back injuries, neck injuries, carpal tunnel syndrome, brain trauma or spinal cord injuries. The Federal Employees Liability Act protects railroad workers and others as diverse as clerical employees whose day-to-day functions do not directly involve trains or outdoor activity.

Students in the 12-quarter Graphic Design bachelor?s degree program have an opportunity to expand on theory, practice and process, developing skills in creative problem solving. This program is designed to establish a strong foundation in traditional design and computer skills, and then build advanced competence in the application of the skills.
Students have an opportunity to learn to couple their creativity with sound business skills necessary for entry into the field. They can learn to initiate, manage, produce, and deliver effective design concepts. Students study two- and three-dimensional design, marketing, and media design. They explore color theory, visual composition, typography, information graphics, digital and print production processes, and law as it relates to the graphic arts. Students also have an opportunity to learn to use computer illustration, image manipulation, web layout and programming, and page layout programs to master design skills.
Graphic Design students have the opportunity to learn the skills to write effective r?sum?s and conduct successful job interviews. They graduate with a professional portfolio to show potential employers and are prepared to join the industry in entry-level positions in fields such as advertising, business communication, publishing, and education.
For graphic designers, exciting challenges are available; they work on projects like corporate identity programs, consumer package designs, annual reports, exhibition materials, direct mail literature, brochures, manuals, catalogs, and interactive presentations. They create company logos, business cards and stationery, letterheads, print advertisements, magazine and CD covers, posters, signs, and billboards. Graduates will be prepared to seek entry-level positions in agencies, design firms, print houses, and corporate environments.
Objectives: Upon completion of this program, graduates will be able to:
? Demonstrate and apply competencies in industry-specific computer software programs within the context of producing concrete projects. This includes technical aspects of prepress, output, and quality reproduction as well as Web design.
? Analyze and incorporate aesthetics and formal concepts of layout design. This includes spatial relationships, communication legibility and effectiveness, interrelationships among imagery and text, balance, typography, and color theory.
? Demonstrate design concepts and relate these to historical and contemporary trends and social context by producing successful visual solutions to assigned problems.
? Model the interdependence of content and visual expression and be able to evaluate and critique their ideas. Graduates must be able to verbally articulate the vision behind their creative work and explain and promote their solutions.
? Demonstrate professional presentation; articulation of knowledge of graphic design and visual problem solving, and mastery of industry standards, professional practices and ethics.

About Our School
Pathfinder K-8 is located at the Cooper Elementary Building on Pigeon Point in West Seattle.
Pathfinder K-8 is an alternative public school where children are engaged in expeditionary learning. Native American cultures are the foundation from which we teach about many cultures, providing opportunities for our students to make their own cultural connections.
Pathfinder educates students to become passionate, lifelong learners, respecting themselves, others and the environment.
At Pathfinder we believe:
- A safe, respectful environment is essential for learning.
- High academic and behavioral standards encourage children to reach their personal best.
- A complete education comes from a caring community, including the partnership of students, staff, parents and other contributors.
- Children must learn to solve problems and be responsible citizens in social and academic settings.
- Multicultural education broadens awareness of and fosters and appreciation for diversity.
- Children need current technology, and the appropriate tools and physical environment to support their learning.
- Teaching our children to respect and care for our natural environment creates future stewards for our planet.

I’ve seen several articles debating when oil production will peak. For those of you who have missed them, oil prices rise due to scarcity (real or not) or increased production costs, and the latter become important sometime around when oil production peaks. Also, the time for us to go through the second half of the world’s oil will be considerably less than the history of oil use to date, and our transportation infrastructure in particular is heavily oil-based.
Among climate change scientists, there seems to be less worry about running out of oil, and considerably more worry about its use. Recent readings have given me some understanding.
David Greene, et al, from (pdf file) Running Out of and into Oil: Analyzing Global Oil Depletion and Transition Through 2050
“It is possible that the world could go partway down the path of developing unconventional oil resources and later reverse direction. But such a strategy would strand huge investments in the more capital-intensive production and refining of unconventional oil. If the transition to unconventional oil is gradual, there might be time to introduce low-carbon alternatives and a reversal might not be too costly. But if the transition to unconventional oil is sudden and massive, the world’s economies might quickly become locked into a high carbon future. Avoiding or even slowing the transition to unconventional fossil resources might improve the world’s chances of successfully dealing with global climate change.”
The unconventional oil sources referred to are coal to liquids (synfuel), for example, or natural gas to liquids (isn’t all natural gas needed for electricity and heating?) Both increase carbon emissions, in part because of the energy needed to convert them to liquid. Both are expensive because they require so much energy for the process.
Oil prices will rise if we hit a peak, but Europeans and others are already living with much higher gasoline prices.
Detour: A vote on the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is expected soon. My understanding is that oil companies are not particularly interested in drilling there without some kind of guarantee (a large guarantee, but will that dissuade Congress?), as there is relatively little oil, and it’s relatively far from where it would be used. I’m not sure why anyone would vote for opening up the site to oil drilling, both for practical reasons and because it’s nice to imagine those few places in the world not crowded by us. What I hear is, “got you, you crummy environmentalists”, but perhaps our legislators have other reasons, poorly articulated to date. Certainly these reasons have little to do with oil security, even for the rare person who also votes to increase car mileage standards. That said, the overwhelming concern to the caribou is not the drilling, but the use of oil. Climate change alters the environment at high altitudes faster, and refuge status will not protect ANWR.
Return: From my reading, it is apparent that the rest of the world, as non-OPEC is generally referred to, is running out of oil much faster than is OPEC. Fareed Zakaria in The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad points out that governments that finance themselves without taxes are not as accountable to citizens. Hence there is worldwide discomfort at financing these governments. But the discomfort is not great enough here in the United States to taxing oil in order to encourage us to change our behavior.
We would be much better off raising taxes on oil use today. Even a moderate tax, perhaps as little as $1/gallon, will begin to shift behavior, to help stretch out our current oil supply and allow the transitions away from fossil fuels, so that we don’t finance OPEC governments so heavily.
Oh, I’ve heard many, particularly poor people, say, but we can’t afford it. Perhaps more earned income credit, or some other mechanism, could help the poor in this transition, and let people choose whether to spend the extra money on a car or the bus. It isn’t right to ignore those who will be hurt in a transition. But we are wrong if we do not transition. Some talk about making the carbon tax revenue neutral, an idea I was more sympathetic to until the Bush deficits, and back when I thought roads and bridges are paid for by the current gasoline tax rather than out of general revenue.
We could do more regional planning of mass transit systems. We could use some of the gasoline tax to pay for the roads and mass transit that makes our roads less crowded. We could teach bicycling as a PE option, as those who learn to bicycle and signal correctly are less dangerous to themselves and others and are more likely to continue bicycling as adults. This would leave more oil for those of you who can’t or don’t want to bicycle. There’s lots we can do.
The cost of our transportation continues to increase. The obvious increases in price are accompanied by the continued power of corrupt governments, the costs to agriculture and water supplies and human settlements and peace from climate change. Let’s add some of these costs, or the desire to avoid these costs, to the price of gasoline. The costs will be paid, either as lower costs consciously assumed today or higher costs imposed tomorrow.

Tax Day has just passed by, and there has been customary grumbling in some circles about how awful income taxes are in the United States. However, most of the data on taxes indicate that Americans are actually paying the least they have in decades. The tax burden is lighter on nearly every segment of society.
Politicians wonder how we wound up with a deficit
The 1950s were an ideal decade to a lot of people. Wholesome and clean television shows like “Howdy Doody” and “Leave it to Beaver” ruled the airwaves; people pursued the American Dream with gusto and patriotism; and they paid more in income tax — before Medicare and Medicaid ever existed, according to USA Today. Average Americans devoted about 27 percent of their gross income to taxes from the 1950s until the 1990s, when the tax rate began to trail off. In 2010, it was down to 23.6 percent of gross income. Were taxes to be raised back to 1950s levels of taxation, it would raise approximately $500 billion. According to MSN, the Internal Revenue Service estimates that it issues more than $328 billion in tax refunds every year.
The people who have benefited, at least in some way, from lower income taxes and some generous tax breaks are poorer households, according to CNN. It was widely reported that the Tax Policy Center found that 45 percent of households did not or would not have to pay a dime in income taxes. Not having to pay taxes does sound attractive, but 68 percent of those people earned $50,000 per year or less. For people who earned $500,000 to $1 million per year, only 1.6 percent didn’t owe or have to pay any taxes, and only 1 percent of people who earned $1 million or more didn’t owe or have to pay. Still, the tax burden placed on the wealthiest seems disproportionate even to the wealthy. Charles Munger, right hand man to none other than Warren Buffet, said at a recent Berkshire-Hathaway conference that hedge fund managers paying lower tax rates than “professors of physics or cab drivers” was “demented,” according to the Motley Fool.
IRS not immune to fraud
The Internal Revenue Service is collecting less and paying more these days. The IRS wound up paying more than $12 million to dead people in a tax scam ring, according to MSN. More than 5,000 returns were filed fraudulently using the names and Social Security numbers of deceased individuals in the hopes of fooling the IRS into cutting a check to someone who wasn’t alivet. A man in Florida was ordered to apply for an Electronic Filing Identification Number, which was used by others after he received it to find recently deceased people and electronically filing tax returns using their identities. The IRS has recovered more than $800,000 from Bank of America accounts and more than $700,000 in Chase accounts used for this purpose.

Rutabagas are a wonderful addition to the winter diet. They are a member the brassica genus of plants which includes other cruciferous vegetables like cauliflower, Brussels sprouts and broccoli. Their sweet, yellow flesh can be mashed, roasted, steamed or sauteed.
Rutabagas are rich in vitamin C, dietary fiber, potassium and antioxidant compounds, important nutrients for any healthy diet. And they offer plenty of those nutrients!
- One cup of cubed, boiled rutabaga contains 66 calories’ It has 2.2 grams of protein, 4 percent of the recommended daily amount!
- That one cup of rutabagas also offers 12 percent of the recommended daily intake of fiber. One cup provides 3.1 grams.
- It also provides 16 percent of the daily potassium requirements and 10 percent of the daily value of magnesium and phosphorus.
- Rutabaga is an excellent source of vitamin C. One cup provides 53 percent of the recommended daily value and 4 to 9 percent of the B-vitamins.
- Rutabaga contains the phytochemicals called isothiocyanates. These are best obtained from raw cruciferous vegetables because they can’t be absorbed as well after the vegetable is cooked.
The health benefits of you’ll gain from these flavorful roots are also impressive!
- The phytochemicals remove carcinogens from the body and help the liver process toxins. One phytochemical, glucosinolate, may inhibit the growth of cancerous tumors.
- It’s store of antioxidants help prevent free radical damage to our cells and DNA, boosts the immune system and helps prevent illness and disease. Rutabaga also contains carotenoids, which help stimulate the antioxidant activity.
- Rutabaga is a good source of fiber which helps support the body’s digestive system, is essential to colon health, digestion and healthy metabolism. The glucosinolates may also help the stomach process bacteria.
- The potassium found in rutabaga helps promote bone strength, aids in energy production and supports heart health and metabolism.
Still not sold on rutabaga? Try slow-roasting with a touch of sea salt, and grape seed oil as part of a winter dinner, add to soups and stews, or get a big dose of phytochemicals with a crunchy salad of walnuts, chopped rutabaga, spinach, and dried cranberries.
If you’re not already a rutabaga fan … give it a try, you will be!

Oct. 13, 2010 -- The idiom “a dog’s life” suggests that pooches have it made when it comes to happiness, but new research indicates that the emotional states of dogs can be as varied as the moods of their owners.
Dogs can see their food bowls as half empty rather than half full, just as human pessimists see a glass of water as half empty instead of half full.
British researchers who tested separation reactions of dogs say they found that some dogs are more likely than others to become depressed and anxious when left alone, causing them to bark, scratch at doors, chew on furniture, and generally misbehave.
On the other hand, optimistic dogs are more likely to behave better and become more relaxed when left alone.
Mike Mendl, PhD, head of animal welfare and behavioral research at the University of Bristol, and colleagues, studied 24 dogs, males and females, that had been sent to two animal centers.
Each dog was tested beforehand for separation anxiety-related behaviors. A researcher played with each dog in an isolated room for 20 minutes.
The next day the dogs were taken back to their rooms and left alone for five minutes while video cameras recorded their behavior.
Some of the dogs barked, jumped on furniture, and scratched at the door, but the “optimistic” ones did not -- or didn’t do it as much.
To study optimistic or pessimistic tendencies, the dogs were trained so that when a bowl was placed at one location in a room, it contained food, but when put somewhere else, it didn’t. Then the bowls were placed at ambiguous locations between the positive and negative positions.
“Dogs that ran fast to these ambiguous locations as if expecting the positive food reward were classed as making relatively ‘optimistic’ decisions,” Mendl says in a news release. "Interestingly, these dogs tended to be the ones who also showed least anxiety-like behavior when left alone for a short time.”
He says about half of dogs may at some point engage in behaviors related to separation anxiety, such as barking, scratching, or tearing things up when separated from owners.
“Our study suggests that dogs showing these types of behavior also appear to make more pessimistic judgments generally,” he says.
“We all have a tendency to think that our pets and other animals experience emotions similar to our own, but we have no way of knowing directly because emotions are essentially private,” he says. “However, we can use findings from human psychology research to develop new ways of measuring animal emotion.”
It’s known that the emotional states of people affect their judgments, and that happy people are more likely to judge an ambiguous situation in a positive way. And it’s apparently the same with dogs.
“What our study has shown is that this applies similarly to dogs -- that a ‘glass-half-full’ dog is less likely to be anxious when left alone than one with a more pessimistic nature,” Mendl says.

European Painting before 1900, Johnson Collection
Green Park, LondonMade in London, England, Europe
1870 or 1871
Claude Monet, French, 1840 - 1926
Oil on canvas
W1921-1-7Purchased with the W. P. Wilstach Fund, 1921
LabelIn the autumn of 1870, in the midst of the Franco-Prussian War, Monet and his wife left France for exile in London, where they remained until June 1871. There the artist painted this panorama of a park in the heart of the city. In later years Monet would return to London, painting numerous views of city sights, including the Houses of Parliament.
Social Tags [?]green park [x] impressionist [x] landscape 19c [x] london [x] monet [x] [Add Your Own Tags]
* Works in the collection are moved off view for many different reasons. Although gallery locations on the website are updated regularly, there is no guarantee that this object will be on display on the day of your visit.

European Decorative Arts and Sculpture
Cloister with Elements from the Abbey of Saint-Genis-des-FontainesMade in Roussillon, France, Europe
1270-80s, with medieval elements from southwestern France and modern additions
Artist/maker unknown, French
1928-57-1bPurchased with funds contributed by Elizabeth Malcolm Bowman in memory of Wendell Phillips Bowman, 1928
LabelAt the heart of every medieval monastery stood a cloister, an arcaded walkway surrounding a courtyard. The Museum’s cloister is modeled after a thirteenth-century example at the Abbey of Saint-Genis-des-Fontaines in the Roussillon region of southwestern France, and includes sculpture originally from the abbey, contemporary elements from the province, and early-twentieth-century reproduction carvings. Medieval cloisters served both practical and spiritual purposes. Most were open air, often with a garden in the courtyard. A ninth-century architectural drawing known as the Plan of Saint Gall, which is considered a blueprint of the ideal monastic compound, features a large, centrally located cloister that would have been reserved for the monks. At Saint-Genis-des-Fontaines, the outer walkway held doors that opened into the dining hall, the chapter house (where the abbey was administered), and the church. In addition to functioning as a connecting space, the courtyard and its colonnade were used by the religious community for processions, services, and communal readings. The cloister also provided an area where individual monks could engage in private prayer and contemplation.
Social Tags [?]european art 1100-1500 [x] period room [x] st-genis-des-fontaines [x] st-michel-de-cuxa [x] [Add Your Own Tags]
* Works in the collection are moved off view for many different reasons. Although gallery locations on the website are updated regularly, there is no guarantee that this object will be on display on the day of your visit.

Thursday, September 1st, 1859, 11:18am:
Thirty three year-old Richard Carringto, widely acknowledged to be one of England's foremost solar astronomer, was in his well-appointed private observatory. Just as usual on every sunny day, his telescope was projecting an 11-inch-wide image of the sun on a screen, and Carrington skillfully drew the sunspots he saw.
On that morning, he was capturing the likeness of an enormous group of sunspots. Suddenly, before his eyes, two brilliant beads of blinding white light appeared over the sunspots, intensified rapidly, and became kidney-shaped. Realizing that he was witnessing something unprecedented and "being somewhat flurried by the surprise," Carrington later wrote, "I hastily ran to call someone to witness the exhibition with me. On returning within 60 seconds, I was mortified to find that it was already much changed and enfeebled." He and his witness watched the white spots contract to mere pinpoints and disappear.
Friday, September 2nd, 1859:
Just before dawn the next day, skies all over planet Earth erupted in red, green, and purple auroras so brilliant that newspapers could be read as easily as in daylight. Indeed, stunning auroras pulsated even at near tropical latitudes over Cuba, the Bahamas, Jamaica, El Salvador, and Hawaii. Even more disconcerting, telegraph systems worldwide went haywire. Spark discharges shocked telegraph operators and set the telegraph paper on fire. Even when telegraphers disconnected the batteries powering the lines, aurora-induced electric currents in the wires still allowed messages to be transmitted.
[Click the following images for better reading.]
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
Forecasting the Impact of an 1859-calibre Superstorm on Satellite Resources
THE 1859 SOLAR–TERRESTRIAL DISTURBANCE AND THE CURRENT LIMITS OF EXTREME SPACE WEATHER ACTIVITY
May be read online.
Space Radiation Hazards and the Vision for Space Exploration: Report of a Workshop

Acrophobia is defined as a fear of heights. Unlike a specific phobia like aerophobia -- fear of flying -- and other specific phobias, acrophobia can cause a person to fear a variety of things related to being far from the ground. Depending on the phobia's severity, an acrophobic person may equally fear being on a high floor of a building or simply climbing a ladder.
Acrophobia and Related Conditions
True vertigo is a medical condition that causes a sensation of spinning and dizziness. Illyngophobia is a phobia in which the fear of developing vertigo can actually lead to vertigo-like symptoms. Acrophobia can induce similar feelings, but the three conditions are not the same. See a doctor for tests if you experience vertigo symptoms. Medical tests may include bloodwork, CT scans and MRIs, which can rule out a variety of neurological conditions.
Bathmophobia, or the fear of slopes and stairs, is sometimes related to acrophobia. In bathmophobia, you may panic when viewing a steep slope, even if you have no need to climb the slope. Although many people with bathmophobia have acrophobia, most acrophobia sufferers do not also experience bathmophobia.
Climacophobia is related to bathmophobia, except that the fear generally occurs only when contemplating making a climb. If you suffer from climacophobia, you are probably not afraid to see a steep set of stairs as long as you can remain safely at the bottom. However, climacophobia may occur in tandem with acrophobia.
Aerophobia is the specific fear of flying. Depending on the severity of your fear, you may be afraid of airports and airplanes, or may only feel the fear when in the air. Aerophobia may occasionally occur alongside acrophobia.
Symptoms of Acrophobia
If you experience acrophobia, you may never experience vertigo symptoms. Instead, you may feel a sense of panic when at height. You may instinctively begin to search for something to cling to. You may find that you are unable to trust your own sense of balance. Common reactions include descending immediately, crawling on all fours and kneeling or otherwise lowering the body.
Emotionally and physically, the response to acrophobia is similar to the response to any other phobia. You may begin to shake, sweat, experience heart palpitations and even cry or yell out. You may feel terrified and paralyzed. It might become difficult to think.
If you have acrophobia, it is likely that you will begin to dread situations that may cause you to spend time at height. For example, you may worry that an upcoming vacation will put you into a hotel room on a high floor. You may put off home repairs for fear of using a ladder. You might avoid visiting friends' homes if they have balconies or upstairs picture windows.
Danger of Acrophobia
The biggest danger that most phobias present is the risk of limiting one's life and activities to avoid the feared situation. Acrophobia is unusual, however, in that having a panic attack while high in the air could actually lead to the imagined danger.
The situation may be safe as long as normal precautions are taken, but panicking could lead you to make unsafe moves. Therefore, it is extremely important that acrophobia be professionally treated as quickly as possible, particularly if heights are a regular part of your life.
Causes of Acrophobia
Research shows that a certain amount of reluctance around heights is normal, not only for humans but for all visual animals. In 1960, famed research psychologists Gibson and Walk did a "Visual Cliff" experiment which showed crawling infants, along with babies of numerous species, who refused to cross a thick glass panel that covered an apparently sharp drop-off. The presence of the infant's mother, encouragingly calling him, did not convince the babies that it was safe.
Therefore, acrophobia seems to be at least partially ingrained, possibly as an evolutionary survival mechanism. Nonetheless, most children and adults use caution but are not inordinately afraid of heights. Acrophobia, like all phobias, appears to be a hyper-reaction of the normal fear response. Many experts believe that this may be a learned response to either a previous fall or a parent's nervous reaction to heights.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy, or CBT, is a main treatment of choice for specific phobias. Behavioral techniques that expose the sufferer to the feared situation either gradually (systematic desensitization) or rapidly (flooding) are frequently used. In addition, the client is taught ways of stopping the panic reaction and regaining emotional control.
Traditionally, actual exposure to heights is the most common solution. However, several research studies performed since 2001 have shown that virtual reality may be just as effective. A major advantage of virtual reality treatment is the savings in both cost and time, as there is no need for "on-location" therapist accompaniment. This method is not yet readily available, but may be worth trying to find if you can.
The drug D-Cycloserine has been in clinical trials for anxiety disorder treatment since 2008. It appears that using the medication in tandem with cognitive-behavioral therapy may improve results, but the research remains preliminary at this time.
Acrophobia appears to be rooted in an evolutionary safety mechanism. Nonetheless, it represents an extreme variation on a normal caution, and can become quite life-limiting for sufferers. It can also be dangerous for those who experience a full panic reaction while at a significant height. Acrophobia can share certain symptoms with vertigo, a medical disorder with a variety of possible causes, as well as with other specific phobias. For these reasons, if you experience the signs of acrophobia, it is extremely important to seek professional help as soon as possible.Sources:
Gibson, E. J., & Walk, R. D. "The 'visual cliff'." Scientific American. 1960. 202, 67-71. May 5, 2008. Retrieved from http://www.wadsworth.com/psychology_d/templates/student_resources/0155060678_rathus/ps/ps05.html
Emmelkamp, Paul, Bruynzeel, Mary, Drost, Leonie, van der Mast, Charles. "Virtual Reality Treatment in Acrophobia: A Comparison with Exposure in Vivo" CyberPsychology & Behavior. June 1, 2001, 4(3): 335-339. May 5, 2008.

With the worlds energy needs growing rapidly, can zero-carbon energy options be scaled up enough to make a significant difference? How much of a dent can these alternatives make in the worlds total energy usage over the next half-century? As the MIT Energy Initiative approaches its fifth anniversary next month, this five-part series takes a broad view of the likely scalable energy candidates.
Of all the zero-carbon energy sources available, wind power is the only one thats truly cost-competitive today: A 2006 report by the U.S. Energy Information Administration put the total cost for wind-produced electricity at an average of $55.80 per megawatt-hour, compared to $53.10 for coal, $52.50 for natural gas and $59.30 for nuclear power.
As a result, wind turbines are being deployed rapidly in many parts of the United States and around the world. And because of winds proven record and its immediate and widespread availability, its an energy source thats seen as having the potential to grow very rapidly.
Wind is probably one of the most significant renewable energy sources, simply because the technology is mature, says Paul Sclavounos, an MIT professor of mechanical engineering and naval architecture. There is no technological risk.
Globally, 2 percent of electricity now comes from wind, and in some places the rate is much higher: Denmark, the present world leader, gets more than 19 percent of its electricity from wind, and is aiming to boost that number to 50 percent. Some experts estimate wind power could account for 10 to 20 percent of world electricity generation over the next few decades.
Taking a longer-term view, a widely cited 2005 study by researchers at Stanford University projected that wind, if fully harnessed worldwide, could theoretically meet the worlds present energy needs five times over. And a 2010 study by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory found that the United States could get more than 12 times its current electricity consumption from wind alone.
But impressive as these figures may sound, wind power still has a long way to go before it becomes a significant factor in reducing carbon emissions. The potential is there with abundant wind available for harvesting both on land and, especially, over the oceans but harnessing that power efficiently will require enormous investments in manufacturing and installation.
So far, installed wind power has the capacity to generate only about 0.2 terawatts (trillions of watts) of energy worldwide a number that pales in comparison to an average world demand of 14 terawatts, expected to double by 2050. The World Wind Energy Association now projects global wind-power capacity of 1.9 terawatts by 2020.
But thats peak capacity, and even in the best locations the wind doesnt blow all the time. In fact, the worlds wind farms operate at an average capacity factor (the percentage of their maximum power that is actually delivered) somewhere between 20 and 40 percent, depending on their location and the technology.
Some analysts are also concerned that widespread deployment of wind power, with its inherently unpredictable swings in output, could stress power grids, forcing the repeated startup and shutdown of other generators to compensate for winds variability. Many of the best wind-harvesting sites are far from the areas that most need the power, necessitating significant investment in delivery infrastructure but building wind farms closer to population centers is controversial because many people object to their appearance and their sounds.
One potential solution to these problems lies offshore. While many wind installations in Europe have been built within a few miles of shore, in shallow water, there is much greater potential more than 20 miles offshore, where winds blow faster and more reliably. Such sites, while still relatively close to consumers, are generally far enough away to be out of sight.
MITs Sclavounos has been working on the design of wind turbines for installation far offshore, using floating platforms based on technology used in offshore oilrigs. Such installations along the Eastern Seaboard of the United States could theoretically provide most of the electricity needed for the eastern half of the country. And a study in California showed that platforms off the coast there could provide more than two-thirds of the states electricity.
Such floating platforms will be essential if wind is to become a major contributor to reducing global greenhouse gas emissions, says research engineer Stephen Connors, director of the Analysis Group for Regional Energy Alternatives (AGREA) at the MIT Energy Initiative. Wind energy is never going to get big if youre limited to relatively shallow, relatively close [offshore] sites, he says. If youre going to have a large impact, you really need floating structures.
All of the technology needed to install hundreds of floating wind turbines is well established, both from existing near-shore wind farms and from offshore drilling installations. All thats needed is to put the pieces together in a way that works economically.
But deciding just how to do so is no trivial matter. Sclavounos and his students have been working to optimize designs, using computer simulations to test different combinations of platforms and mooring systems to see how they stand up to wind and waves as well as how efficiently they can be assembled, transported and installed. One thing is clear: It wont be one design for all sites, Sclavounos says.
In principle, floating structures should be much more economical than wind farms mounted on the seafloor, as in Europe, which require costly construction and assembly. By contrast, the floating platforms could be fully assembled at an onshore facility, then towed into position and anchored. Whats more, the wind is much steadier far offshore: Whereas a really good land-based site can provide a 35 percent capacity factor, an offshore site can yield 45 percent greatly improving the cost-effectiveness per unit.
There are also concerns about the effects of adding a large amount of intermittent energy production to the national supply. Ron Prinn, director of MITs Joint Center for the Science and Policy of Global Change, says, At large scale, there are issues regarding reliability of renewable but intermittent energy sources like wind that will require adding the costs of backup generation or energy storage.
Exactly how big is offshore wind powers potential? Nobody really knows for sure, since theres insufficient data on the strength and variability of offshore winds. You need to know where and when its windy hour to hour, day to day, season to season and year to year, Connors says. While such data has been collected on land, there is much less information for points offshore. Its a wholly answerable question, but you cant do it by just brainstorming.
And the answers might not be what wind powers advocates want to hear. Some analysts raise questions about how much difference wind power can make. MIT physicist Robert Jaffe says that wind is excellent in certain niche locations, but overall its too diffuse that is, too thinly spread out over the planet to be the major greenhouse gas-curbing technology. In the long term, solar is the best option to be sufficiently scaled up to make a big difference, says Jaffe, the Otto (1939) and Jane Morningstar Professor of Physics.
Connors is confident that wind also has a role to play. This planet is mostly ocean, he says, and its pretty windy out there.
This story is republished courtesy of MIT News (web.mit.edu/newsoffice/), a popular site that covers news about MIT research, innovation and teaching.
Explore further: Study IDs two compressed air energy storage methods, sites for the Northwest
More information: Tomorrow: Vast amounts of solar energy radiate to the Earth constantly, but tapping that energy cost-effectively remains a challenge.
-- Read part 1: "What can make a dent?"

The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft is expected to discover its 1,000TH comet this summer.
The SOHO spacecraft is a joint effort between NASA and the European Space Agency. It has accounted for approximately one-half of all comet discoveries with computed orbits in the history of astronomy.
"Before SOHO was launched, only 16 sun grazing comets had been discovered by space observatories. Based on that experience, who could have predicted SOHO would discover more than 60 times that number, and in only nine years," said Dr. Chris St. Cyr. He is senior project scientist for NASA's Living With a Star program at the agency's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. "This is truly a remarkable achievement!"
About 85 percent of the comets SOHO discovered belongs to the Kreutz group of sun grazing comets, so named because their orbits take them very close to Earth's star. The Kreutz sun grazers pass within 500,000 miles of the star's visible surface. Mercury, the planet closest to the sun, is about 36 million miles from the solar surface.
SOHO has also been used to discover three other well-populated comet groups: the Meyer, with at least 55 members; Marsden, with at least 21 members; and the Kracht, with 24 members. These groups are named after the astronomers who suggested the comets are related, because they have similar orbits.
Many comet discoveries were made by amateurs using SOHO images on the Internet. SOHO comet hunters come from all over the world. The United States, United Kingdom, China, Japan, Taiwan, Russia, Ukraine, France, Germany, and Lithuania are among the many countries whose citizens have used SOHO to chase comets.
Almost all of SOHO's comets are discovered using images from its Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument. LASCO is used to observe the faint, multimillion-degree outer atmosphere of the sun, called the corona. A disk in the instrument is used to make an artificial eclipse, blocking direct light from the sun, so the much fainter corona can be seen. Sun grazing comets are discovered when they enter LASCO's field of view as they pass close by the star.
"Building coronagraphs like LASCO is still more art than science, because the light we are trying to detect is very faint," said Dr. Joe Gurman, U.S. project scientist for SOHO at Goddard. "Any imperfections in the optics or dust in the instrument will scatter the light, making the images too noisy to be useful. Discovering almost 1,000 comets since SOHO's launch on December 2, 1995 is a testament to the skill of the LASCO team."
SOHO successfully completed its primary mission in April 1998. It has enough fuel to remain on station to keep hunting comets for decades if the LASCO continues to function.
For information about SOHO on the Internet, visit:
Explore further: Long-term warming, short-term variability: Why climate change is still an issue

What leadership traits can we learn from wolves? In The Wisdom of Wolves author Twyman Towery shares the milieu of the wolf pack where teamwork, loyalty and communication are the norm rather than the exception. Whether it�s their traits of curiosity, perseverance, loyalty or play, wolves exist for the survival of the pack - a lesson humans can apply in business, family or personal relationships. The Wisdom of Wolves shows us that not only has the teamwork of the wolves among themselves been critical to their success, but the teamwork between humans and wolves has helped boost the life environment for both species. The Wisdom of the Wolves provides food for thought: The strength of the pack is the wolf and the strength of the wolf is the pack.
Simple Truths provides customers with inspirational and motivational gift books and movies. Our books and movies are comprised of short inspirational stories and motivational quotes that are certain to make a positive lasting impression. Simple Truths gift books and movies are great for friends & family, co-workers, teachers, students, corporations and businesses.

Forcing yourself to look at the big picture, or pretending that you are a fly on the wall observing a scene as it unfolds, can be an effective anger management strategy.
Experts say that changing the focus from being a participant in a stressful situation, to being an observer from a distanced perspective can help an individual come to a true understanding of their feelings.
Researchers call this strategy “self-distancing.”
In a new study, college students who believed a lab partner was berating them for not following directions responded less aggressively and showed less anger when they were told to take analyze their feelings from a self-distanced perspective.
“The secret is to not get immersed in your own anger and, instead, have a more detached view,” said Dominik Mischkowski, lead author of the research performed at Ohio State University.
“You have to see yourself in this stressful situation as a fly on the wall would see it.”
While other studies have examined the value of self-distancing for calming angry feelings, this is the first to show that it can work in the heat of the moment, when people are most likely to act aggressively, Mischkowski said.
The worst thing to do in an anger-inducing situation is what people normally do: try to focus on their hurt and angry feelings to understand them, said Brad Bushman, Ph.D., a co-author of the study.
“If you focus too much on how you’re feeling, it usually backfires,” Bushman said.
“It keeps the aggressive thoughts and feelings active in your mind, which makes it more likely that you’ll act aggressively.”
Study findings are found online in the Journal of Experimental Social Psychology and will be published in a future print edition.
To prove the concept, researchers performed to related studies. The first involved 94 college students who were told they were participating in a study about the effects of music on problem solving, creativity and emotions.
The students listened to an intense piece of classical music while attempting to solve 14 difficult anagrams (rearranging a group of letters to form a word such as “pandemonium”). They had only seven seconds to solve each anagram, record their answer and communicate it to the experimenter over an intercom.
But the plan of the study was to provoke the students into anger, which the experimenters did using a technique which has been used many times in similar studies.
The experimenter interrupted the study participants several times to ask them to speak louder into the intercom, finally saying “Look, this is the third time I have to say this! Can’t you follow directions? Speak louder!”
After this part of the experiment, the participants were told they would be participating in a task examining the effects of music on creativity and feelings.
The students were told to go back to the anagram task and “see the scene in your mind’s eye.” They were put into three groups, each of which were asked to view the scene in different ways.
Some students were told to adopt a self-immersed perspective (“see the situation unfold through your eyes as if it were happening to you all over again”) and then analyze their feelings surrounding the event.
Others were told to use the self-distancing perspective (“move away from the situation to a point where you can now watch the event unfold from a distance and watch the situation unfold as if it were happening to the distant you all over again”) and then analyze their feelings.
The third control group was not told how to view the scene or analyze their feelings.
Each group was told to replay the scene in their minds for 45 seconds. Then the researchers tested the participants for aggressive thoughts and angry feelings.
Results showed that students who used the self-distancing perspective had fewer aggressive thoughts and felt less angry than both those who used the self-immersed approach and those in the control group.
“The self-distancing approach helped people regulate their angry feelings and also reduced their aggressive thoughts,” Mischkowski said.
In a second study, the researchers went further and showed that self-distancing can actually make people less aggressive when they’ve been provoked.
In this study, 95 college students were told they were going to do an anagram task, similar to the one in the previous experiment. But in this case, they were told they were going to be working with an unseen student partner, rather than one of researchers (in reality, it actually was one of the researchers).
In this case, the supposed partner was the one who delivered the scathing comments about following directions.
As in the first study, the participants were then randomly assigned to analyze their feelings surrounding the task from a self-immersed or a self-distanced perspective.
Participants assigned to a third control group did not receive any instructions regarding how to view the scene or focus on their feelings.
Next, the participants were told they would be competing against the same partner who had provoked them earlier in a reaction-time task. The winner of the task would get the opportunity to blast the loser with noise through headphones – and the winner chose the intensity and length of the noise blast.
Investigators discovered participants who used the self-distancing perspective to think about their partners’ provocations showed lower levels of aggression than those in the other two groups. That is, their noise blasts against their partner tended to be shorter and less intense.
“These participants were tested very shortly after they had been provoked by their partner,” Mischkowski said.
“The fact that those who used self-distancing showed lower levels of aggression shows that this technique can work in the heat of the moment, when the anger is still fresh.”
Of interest is the discovery that those who used the self-distancing approach showed less aggression than those in the control group, who were not told how to view the anger-inducing incident with their partner.
This suggests people may naturally use a self-immersing perspective when confronted with a provocation – a perspective that is not likely to reduce anger.
Thus, the tendency to immerse oneself in a problem (anger) to work through the situation, may backfire and make an individual more aggressive.
A better technique to use when angry is distraction – thinking of something calming to take the mind off the anger. However, even this technique is only a short-term strategy.
Mischkowski believes the research clearly shows that self-distancing is the best method to mitigate anger.
“But self-distancing really works, even right after a provocation – it is a powerful intervention tool that anyone can use when they’re angry.”
Source: Ohio State University

Within the next 10 years the EU-funded Diabetes Prevention study, part of an international study called TRIGR (Trial to Reduce IDDM in the Genetically at Risk), coordinated at the University of Helsinki, Finland, will generate a definite answer to the question whether early nutritional modification may prevent type 1 diabetes later in childhood.
Type 1 diabetes is a growing health problem among European children. European data indicate that the disease incidence has increased five-six-fold among children under the age of 15 years after World War II, and there are no signs that the increase in incidence is levelling off. The most conspicuous increase has been seen among children under the age of 5 years.
The TRIGR study is the first study ever aimed at primary prevention of type 1 diabetes. The study is designed to answer to the question whether excluding cow's milk protein from the infant's diet decreases the risk of fu-ture diabetes. All subjects are followed for 10 years to get information on whether the dietary recommendations for infants at increased genetic risk of type 1 diabetes should be revised.
Starting in May 2002, 76 study centres from 15 countries (Australia, Canada, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and USA) have been recruiting families for the study. To be eligible the newborn infant has to have at least one family member (mother, father and/or sib) affected by type 1 diabetes and carry a HLA genotype conferring increased risk for type 1 diabetes. The initial recruitment target of 2032 eligible infants was reached at the be-ginning of September 2006, but the Study Group has decided to continue recruitment till the end of December 2006 (when the EU contribution will finish) to make the study even more powerful statistically.
A majority of the study participants (52%) have been recruited in Europe. The International Coordinating Cen-tre (ICC) is located at the University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland and the Data Management Unit (DMU) at the University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA. The trial has logistically been a true challenge for both the ICC and DMU. DMU has been successful in establishing a secure, real-time, web-based, interactive data management system that works extremely well. This system can be directly applied to future international mul-ticentre studies.
The TRIGR study is generating a wealth of information on breast-feeding practices, infant nutrition and growth in young children in various countries. At 2 weeks of age almost all the participating infants were breast-fed. Exclusive breast-feeding continued longer in Europe than in North America. More than one third of the infants (35 %) received other foods in addition to breast milk and/or infant formulas at the age of 4 months, while WHO recommends that supplementary food should be introduced at the earliest by the age of 6 months. In Europe the first foods to be introduced are typically vegetables and fruits, whereas gluten-free cereals are most commonly introduced in North America.
Newborn infants in Northern Europe (NE) had a higher birth weight but a shorter birth length than infants in Central and Southern Europe (CSE). The NE children remained heavier than those from CSE at least up to the age of 18 months. The NE children were also taller than the CSE children starting already from the age of 3 months up to the age of 18 months. Accelerated growth in infancy has been identified as a risk factor for type 1 diabetes later in childhood. Accordingly the observed growth pattern may contribute to the higher incidence of type 1 diabetes in NE compared to CSE.
Professor Mikael Knip, University of Helsinki
Phone: +358 40 844 7671
Study websites: http://www.trigr.org
Last reviewed: By John M. Grohol, Psy.D. on 21 Feb 2009
Published on PsychCentral.com. All rights reserved.

- The growing field of global health delivery is in need of technological strategies to improve transparency and operations research.
- Our organization has implemented several simple “Web 2.0” strategies while delivering medical and public health services in rural Nepal.
- These strategies help Nyaya Health improve transparency, receive critical commentary from outside experts, and compare approaches to organizing budgets, pharmaceutical procurement, medical treatment protocols, and public health programs.
- The platforms include quantitative outcomes data and logistics protocols on a wiki; an open-access, online deidentified patient database; geospatial data analysis through real-time maps; a blog; and a public line-by-line online budget.
Nyaya Health and Global Health Delivery 2.0: Using Open-Access Technologies for Transparency and Operations Research
Publicado por Manuel Menéndez January 23, 2010 Etiquetas: Benefits of Open Access

The clutch assembly consists of a clutch disc, a clutch pressure plate, and a clutch release bearing. All these components are usually replaced at the same time. The clutch assembly has two key functions: it transmits power produced by the engine to the gearbox, and it allows that power to be interrupted when the clutch pedal is depressed. Power produced by the engine requires this interruption. It makes it possible to change gears and to shift into neutral at a traffic light or stop sign.
When the clutch assembly is not operating correctly, two things can happen. It either doesn't interrupt the power from the engine to the gearbox, which causes grinding sounds and difficulty in selecting gears. Or it fails to transmit the drive from the engine to the gearbox. This results in the engine “revving up” without the vehicle speed increasing. In the case of a complete failure, the engine will rev up, but the vehicle will not move. Clutch components naturally wear out. Clutch components may fail or wear due to; bad driving habits, being driven with the clutch improperly adjusted, or from exposure to oil.
To replace the clutch assembly, the driveshaft (or half shafts where applicable) and the manual transmission (gearbox) must be removed to gain access to the clutch components. New clutch components are fitted and the gearbox is then reinstalled.

People who struggle to find enough food to eat are poor. The World Bank’s poverty line is an income of less than $1.25 a day. Financial Times readers, who spend more than that amount on their morning newspaper, are in no position to dispute that judgment. In the past two decades, economic growth in China and India has reduced global poverty by an unprecedented amount. That achievement is not diminished because some individuals in both these countries have become very rich. Fundamentally, poverty is about absolute deprivation.Kay observes that there is also a relative definition of poverty:
Under the definition that I have proposed on this blog for wealth, poverty would simply be an absence of wealth, or a deficit of valued outcomes.
The median income is the level that equal numbers of people are above and below, so that a rise in Sir Martin Sorrell’s bonus does not lead anyone into poverty – that would confuse poverty and inequality. But the choice of median income as a reference level has a wider significance. It encapsulates the idea that in a rich society, poverty is an enforced inability to participate in the everyday activities of that society. You might therefore be poor if you lack access to antibiotics or Facebook, even though in this respect you are no worse off than the Sun King or John D. Rockefeller, and in other respects considerably better off than most people in the world.
However, to define poverty as social exclusion takes the definition far away from the assessment of income. It is not hard to imagine places in which few, if any, people experience a sense of exclusion. These might include both sophisticated societies with high incomes per head – towns in Scandinavia – and simple cultures without access to modern essentials – rural villages in the developing world. Poverty becomes a cultural and political phenomenon rather than an economic one.
But once we define poverty in terms of outcomes beyond simple incomes as measured in currency units, we have indeed entered the territory of culture and politics, and ultimately, what constitutes a life worth living.
Just as GDP doesn't measure all that matters when it comes to wealth, I am deeply skeptical of efforts to define multi-dimensional metrics of "poverty" that integrate different valued outcomes. Statistics are indeed important inputs to policy, and I prefer mine simple and transparent.
So let's leave poverty defined in terms of absolute income, as defined by the World Bank and others. If we care about obesity, lack of access to antibiotics or even Facebook -- all perfectly legitimate valued outcomes -- then let's track these outcomes on their merits and based on transparent variables that measure these outcomes. Just don't label these issues "poverty" as it will conflate arguments about what it means to be wealthy with efforts to attain whatever valued outcomes we as a society decide to pursue.

- Giovanni Battista Montini
Son of a prominent newspaper editor. Ordained in Brescia, Italy on 29 May 1920, he continued his studies in Rome, Italy, and became part of the Vatican secretariat of state in 1922. One of two pro-secretaries to Pope Pius XII. Archbishop of Milan from 1954 to 1963 where he worked on social problems and to improve relations between workers and employers. Created cardinal-priest of Santi Silvestro e Martino ai Monti on 15 December 1958. Elected 262nd Pope in 1963.
As Pope, Paul continued the reforms of John XXIII. He re-convened the Second Vatican Council, and supervised implementations of many of its reforms, such as the vernacularization and reform of the liturgy. He instituted an international synod of bishops; bishops were instructed to set up councils of priests in their own dioceses. Powers of dispensation devolved from the Roman Curia onto the bishops, rules on fasting and abstinence were relaxed, and some restrictions on inter-marriage were lifted. A commission to revise canon law revision was established.
In 1964, Paul made a pilgrimage to the Holy Lands, becoming the first pope in over 150 years to leave Italy. That was followed by trips to India in 1964, the United States in 1965, where he addressed the United Nations, Africa in 1969, and Southeast Asia in 1970. Relations between the Vatican and the Communists improved, and Communist leaders visited the Vatican for the first time. Paul met with leaders of other churches, and in 1969 addressed the World Council of Churches, and limited doctrinal agreements were reached with the Anglicans and Lutherans. Paul issued frequent reassertions of papal primacy in the face of growing dissent within the Roman Catholic Church itself. He enlarged the college of cardinals, and added cardinals from third world countries.
In the 1968 encyclical Humanae Vitae, Paul reaffirmed the church’s ban on contraception, a disappointment to many liberals. It led to protests, and many national hierarchies openly modified the statement. Liberals raised questions about priestly celibacy, divorce, and the role of women in the church, but Paul held to traditional Church positions.
- if you have information relevant to the beatication of Pope Paul, contact
Rev. Antonio Marrazzo, CSSR
Associazione Paolo VI
Via Trieste, 13
25121 Brescia, ITALY
- “Venerable Pope Paul VI“. Saints.SQPN.com. 6 February 2013. Web. 21 May 2013. <>

By Tom Baxter
A few years ago, Emory’s Michael C. Carlos Museum hosted a fascinating exhibit based on the papyrus legal records of a family which lived in Egypt in the 5th Century BC. As a testament to the lasting lessons such archaeological treasures can transmit, it came to mind last week when Barack Obama became the first sitting U.S. president to endorse same-sex marriage.
The papyri were the legal documents of a couple, Ananiah, a Jewish temple official, and his wife Tamut, an Egyptian woman who’d been sold into slavery as a child. They lived on the island of Elephantine in the Nile, in a time when Egypt was part of the Persian Empire and Jewish mercenaries guarded its southern border.
As it is today, relationships could be complicated back then. When she married Ananiah on July 3, 449 BC, Tamut was owned by another man, Meshullam, who didn’t free her or her daughter for another 22 years. Things worked out, though. Later papyri record Ananiah giving Tamut part ownership of their house, selling a house to his son-in-law and making payments on a wedding gift for their daughter.
The records are a striking contrast of the bizarre with the familiar. The conventions of legalese have changed so little over the millenia that a modern-day lawyer would feel completely at home with these contracts. But the concept of marriage around which these legal proceedings revolve appears to have been radically different from ours today.
The contract between Ananiah and Tamut is so detailed that it specifies on which side of the stairs each is to walk up and down. But as far as the state was concerned, marriage contracts like theirs – the notarized enumeration of what one party could take the other to court for, if things didn’t work out – was all the marriage was. Since Ananiah was a religious leader, there may have been a ceremony to sanctify the marriage within the Jewish community on the island, but over the whole of Egyptian society, the state’s involvement in defining, protecting and preserving marriage was quite limited and specific to each coupling.
If government has developed a better way to deal with this complex aspect of human society, it was not in evidence last week, when North Carolina voters overwhelmingly declared their support for an amendment defining marriage solely as the union between a man and a woman, and Obama declared the next day that he’d decided his “evolving” views on the subject and supports the right of people of the same sex to marry.
By comparison with other historic stands taken by presidents, Obama’s carried remarkably little weight. The states decide this issue, and one just had. Obama’s statement on a morning news show the following day was couched more as something which had been forced by Vice President Joe Biden’s unguarded comments on the subject rather than the embarrassment of a big vote in the state where the Democrats will hold their convention this summer. This sounds progressively more fishy the longer you think about it, particularly when you hear how angry the Obama staffers sounded about Biden’s goofiness, according to the reporters who repeated on-the-record what the staffers told them off-the-record.
Yet symbolically, Obama’s statement was rightly looked on as an historic event. The North Carolina vote, which put into the state constitution what was already on the books as state law, was also largely symbolic. And lemme tell you – as former Gov. Roy Barnes might have said after his bitter experience with changing the state flag – symbolism is the rat poison of good government.
Should government get more involved in marriage, as those on both sides of the current controversy would have it, or less? At present the states and the federal government find themselves in a cycle of ineffectiveness. Washington has no power over what the states define marriage to be, but because of the Defense of Marriage Act, signed by President Clinton, which prohibits same-sex couples from the rights and protections of marriage in more than a thousand federal laws, it really doesn’t matter what the states do either. Because our modern concept of marriage — unlike the Egyptians — involves a certain fusion, long since blurred, between the provinces of religion and the state, we appear bound to debate state by state an issue which in some respects can only be settled congregation by congregation.
Nor does government at the federal or the state level have the ability to stop the steady decline in heterosexual marriage, as attested by a voluminous array of statistics on divorce, unwed mothers and single-parent households. In terms of the work hours it has to invest, government’s biggest involvement with marriage today is the administration of breakups and the management of the carnage that often comes with them.
Administratively, things were much easier for Ananiah and Tamut, which makes it impossible to replicate the arrangements of their day. But their preserved family records challenge us to think about whether we’ve really figured out what aspects of marriage government should involve itself in, and what it shouldn’t.

Whenever citing a reference in the text source, it is made with its author’s
surname and the year of publication is to be inserted in the text. Choose
from the listed below to see examples:
• Citing the author in the
• Using direct quotes
• Citing works by more than
• Citing works by three
or more authors
• Citing a chapter of section
• Citing an organization
• Citing works by the same
author written in the same year
• Citing secondary sources
Citing the Author in the Text
Dogs were the first animals to be domesticated (Sheldrake, 1999).
If the author’s name occurs naturally in the sentence the year is
given in brackets.
Sheldrake (1999) asserted that dogs were the first animals to be domesticated.
Using Direct Quotes
If you quote directly from a source, you must insert the author’s
name, date of publication and the page number of the quotation. The domestication
of dogs, long predated the domestication of other animals (Sheldrake, 1999).
Citing works by more than one Author
If your source has two authors, you should include both names in the text.
Anderson and Poole (1998) note that a “narrow line often separates
plagiarism from good scholarship.”
Citing works by three or more Authors
If there are three or more authors, you should include the first named author
and then add ‘et al.’ in italics followed by a full stop. This
is an abbreviation of ‘et alia’ which means ‘and others’
In the United States, revenue from computer games now exceeds that of movies
(Kline et al., 2003).
Citing Chapter or Section
When referring to a chapter or section which is part of a larger work, you
should cite the author of the chapter not the editor of the whole work.
The sea level has risen by approximately 10cm in the last 100 years (Mason,
Citing an Organization
If an organization or company (e.g., Department of Health, Arcadia Group
Limited) is named as the author of a work rather than a person, you should
cite their names. Make sure that you use the same version of the organizations
name in both the Text and List of references (e.g., always use ‘Department
of Health’, don’t abbreviate to ‘DoH’).
Spain became a member of the United Nations in 1955 (United Nations, 2000).
Citing Secondary Sources
When citing secondary sources (i.e., an author refers to a work which you
have not read) cite the secondary source, but include the name of the author
and date of publication of the original source in the text.
Only the secondary source should be listed in your List of references. You
should only cite secondary sources if you are unable to read the original
Sheff (1993) notes that Nintendo invested heavily in advertising (cited
in Kline et al., 2003, p. 118).

